Minimum Wages and Employment:
A Case Study of the Fast-Food Industry
in New Jersey and Pennsylvania

On April 1, 1992, New Jersey's minimum wage rose from $4.25 to $5.05 per
hour. To evaluate the impact of the law we surveyed 410 fast-food restaurants in
New Jersey and eastern Pennsylvania before and after the rise. Comparisons of
employment growth at stores in New Jersey and Pennsylvania (where the
minimum wage was constant) provide simple estimates of the effect of the higher
minimum wage. We also compare employment changes at stores in New Jersey
that were initially paying high wages (above $5) to the changes at lower-wage
stores. We find no indication that the rise in the minimum wage reduced
employment. (JEL 530, 523)

How do employers in a low-wage labor
market respond to an increase in the minimum wage? The prediction from conventional economic theory is unambiguous: a
rise in the minimum wage leads perfectly
competitive employers to cut employment
(George J. Stigler, 1946). Although studies
in the 1970's based on aggregate teenage
employment rates usually confirmed this
prediction,' earlier studies based on comparisons of employment at affected and unaffected establishments often did not (e.g.,
Richard A. Lester, 1960, 1964). Several re-

cent studies that rely on a similar comparative methodology have failed to detect a
negative employment effect of higher minimum wages. Analyses of the 1990-1991 increases in the federal minimum wage
(Lawrence F. Katz and Krueger, 1992; Card,
1992a) and of an earlier increase in the
minimum wage in California (Card, 1992b)
find no adverse employment impact. A study
of minimum-wage floors in Britain (Stephen
Machin and Alan Manning, 1994) reaches a
similar conclusion.
This paper presents new evidence on the
effect of minimum wages on establishmentlevel employment outcomes. We analyze the
experiences of 410 fast-food restaurants in
New Jersey and Pennsylvania following the
increase in New Jersey's minimum wage
from $4.25 to $5.05 per hour. Comparisons
of employment, wages, and prices at stores
in New Jersey and Pennsylvania before and
after the rise offer a simple method for
evaluating the effects of the-minimum wage.
~~~~~~i~~~~ within N~~ jerseybetween
high-wage
paying
than the new minimum rate prior to its
effective date) and other stores provide an
alternative estimate of the impact of the
new lawe
In addition to the simplicity of our empirical methodology, several other features of

*Department of Economics, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ 08544. We are grateful to the Institute
for Research on Poverty, University of Wisconsin, for
partial financial support. Thanks to Orley Ashenfelter,
Charles Brown, Richard Lester, Gary Solon, two
anonymous referees, and seminar participants at
Princeton, Michigan State, Texas A&M, University of
Michigan, university of Pennsylvania, ~niversitJ of
Chicago, and the NBER for comments and suggestions. We also acknowledge the expert research assistance of Susan Belden, Chris Burris, Geraldine Harris,
and Jonathan Orszag.
'see Charles Brown et al. (1982,1983) for surveys of
this literature. A recent update (Allison J. Wellington,
1991) concludes that the employment effects of the
minimum wage are negative but small: a 10-percent
increase in the minimum is estimated to lower teenage
employment rates by 0.06 percentage points.

772

VOL. 84 NO. 4

CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT

the New Jersey law and our data set are
also significant. First, the rise in the minimum wage occurred during a recession. The
increase had been legislated two years earlier when the state economy was relatively
healthy. By the time of the actual increase,
the unemployment rate in New Jersey had
risen substantially and last-minute political
action almost succeeded in reducing the
minimum-wage increase. It is unlikely that
the effects of the higher minimum wage
were obscured by a rising tide of general
economic conditions.
Second, New Jersey is a relatively small
state with an economy that is closely linked
to nearby states. We believe that a control
group of fast-food stores in eastern Pennsylvania forms a natural basis for comparison
with the experiences of restaurants in New
Jersey. Wage variation across stores in New
Jersey, however, allows us to compare the
experiences of high-wage and low-wage
stores within New Jersey and to test the
validity of the Pennsylvania control group.
Moreover, since seasonal patterns of employment are similar in New Jersey and
eastern Pennsylvania, as well as across
high- and low-wage stores within New Jersey, our comparative methodology effectively "differences out" any. seasonal employment effects.
Third, we successfully followed nearly 100
percent of stores from a first wave of interviews conducted just before the rise in the
minimum wage (in February and March
1992) to a second wave conducted 7-8
months after (in November and December
1992). We have complete information on
store closings and take account of employment changes at the closed stores in our
analyses. We therefore measure the overall
effect of the minimum wage on average
employment, and not simply its effect on
surviving establishments.
-Our analysis of employment trends at
stores that were open for business before
the increase in the minimum wage ignores
any potential effect of minimum wages on
the rate of new store openings. To assess
the likely magnitude of this effect we relate
state-specific growth rates in the number of
McDonald's fast-food outlets between 1986

773

and 1991 to measures of the relative minimum wage in each state.
I. The New Jersey Law

A bill signed into law in November 1989
raised the federal minimum wage from $3.35
per hour to $3.80 effective April 1, 1990,
with a further increase to $4.25 per hour on
April 1, 1991. In early 1990 the New Jersey
legislature went one step further, enacting
parallel increases in the state minimum wage
for 1990 and 1991 and an increase to $5.05
per hour effective April 1, 1992. The scheduled 1992 increase gave New Jersey the
highest state minimum wage in the country
and was strongly opposed by business leaders in the state (see Bureau of National
Affairs, Daily Labor Report, 5 May 1990).
In the two years between passage of the
$5.05 minimum wage and its effective date,
New Jersey's economy slipped into recession. Concerned with the potentially adverse impact of a higher minimum wage, the
state legislature voted in March 1992 to
phase in the 80-cent increase over two years.
The vote fell just short of the margin required to override a gubernatorial veto, and
the Governor allowed the $5.05 rate to go
into effect on April 1 before vetoing the
two-step legislation. Faced with the prospect
of having to roll back wages for minimumwage earners, the legislature dropped the
issue. Despite a strong last-minute challenge, the $5.05 minimum rate took effect
as originally planned.
11. Sample Design and Evaluation

Early in 1992 we decided to evaluate the
impending increase in the New Jersey minimum wage by surveying fast-food restaurants in New Jersey and eastern Pennsylvaniae2 Our choice of the fast-food industry
was driven by several factors. First, fast-food
stores are a leading employer of low-wage
workers: in 1987, franchised restaurants em-

2At the time we were uncertain whether the $5.05
rate would go into effect or be overridden.

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

SEPTEMBER 1994

Stores in:

A1l

NJ

PA

473
63
410
86.7

364
33
331
90.9

109
30
79
72.5

410
6
2
2
1
399

331

79
1
0
0
0
78

Waue I, February 15-March 4, 1992:
Number of stores in sample frame:a
Number of refusals:
Number interviewed:
Response rate (percentage):

Wace 2, Nocember 5 - December 31, 1992:
Number of stores in sample frame:
Number closed:
Number under rennovation:
Number temporarily closed:'
Number of refusals:
Number i n t e r v i e ~ e d : ~

5
2
2
1
321

aStores with working phone numbers only; 29 stores in original sample frame had
disconnected phone numbers.
'~ncludes one store closed because of highway construction and one store closed
because of a fire.
'Includes 371 phone interviews and 28 personal interviews of stores that refused an
initial request for a phone interview.

ployed 25 percent of all workers in the
restaurant industry (see U.S. Department of
Commerce, 1990 table 13). Second, fast-food
restaurants comply with minimum-wage regulations and would be expected to raise
wages in response to a rise in the minimum
wage. Third, the job requirements and
products of fast-food restaurants are relatively homogeneous, making it easier to obtain reliable measures of employment,
wages, and product prices. The absence of
tips greatly simplifies the measurement of
wages in the industry. Fourth, it is relatively
easy to construct a sample frame of franchised restaurants. Finally, past experience
(Katz and Krueger, 1992) suggested that
fast-food restaurants have high response
rates to telephone survey^.^
Based on these considerations we constructed a sample frame of fast-food restau-

rants in New Jersey and eastern Pennsylvania from the Burger King, KFC, Wendy's,
and Roy Rogers chain^.^ The first wave of
the survey was conducted by telephone in
late February and early March 1992, a little
over a month before the scheduled increase
in New Jersey's minimum wage. The survey
included questions on employment, starting
wages, prices, and other store characteristic~.~
Table 1 shows that 473 stores in our sample frame had working telephone numbers
when we tried to reach them in FebruaryMarch 1992. Restaurants were called as
many as nine times to elicit a response. We
obtained completed interviews (with some
item nonresponse) from 410 of the restaurants, for an overall response rate of 87
percent. The response rate was higher in
New Jersey (91 percent) than in Pennsylva-

3 ~ an pilot survey Katz and Krueger (1992) obtained
very low response rates from McDonald's restaurants.
For this reason, McDonald's restaurants were excluded
from Katz and Krueger's and our sample frames.

4 ~ h seample was derived from white-pages telephone listings for New Jersey and Pennsylvania as of
February 1992.
'copies of the questionnaires used in both waves of
the survey are available from the authors upon request.

VOL. 84 NO. 4

C A m AND KRUEGER: MINIiiMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT

nia (72.5 percent) because our interviewer
made fewer call-backs to nonrespondents in
In the analysis below we inPenn~ylvania.~
vestigate possible biases associated with the
degree of difficulty in obtaining the firstwave interview.
The second wave of the survey was conducted in November and December 1992,
about eight months after the minimum-wage
increase. Only the 410 stores that responded in the first wave were contacted in
the second round of interviews. We successfully interviewed 371 (90 percent) of these
stores by phone in November 1992. Because
of a concern that nonresponding restaurants
might have closed, we hired an interviewer
to drive to each of the 39 nonrespondents
and determine whether the store was still
open, and to conduct a personal interview if
possible. The interviewer discovered that six
restaurants were permanently closed, two
were temporarily closed (one because of a
fire, one because of road construction), and
two were under renovation.' Of the 29 stores
open for business, all but one granted a
request for a personal interview. As a result, we have second-wave interview data
for 99.8 percent of the restaurants that responded in the first wave of the survey, and
information on closure status for 100 percent of the sample.
Table 2 presents the means for several
key variables in our data set, averaged over
the subset of nonmissing responses for each
variable. In constructing the means, employment in wave 2 is set to 0 for the perma-

6 ~ e s p o n s erates per call-back were almost identical
in the two states. Among New Jersey stores, 44.5
percent responded on the first call, and 72.0 percent
responded after at most two call-backs. Among Pennsylvania stores 42.2 percent responded on the first call,
and 71.6 percent responded after at most two callbacks.
7 ~ ofs April 1993 the store closed because of road
construction and one of the stores closed for renovation had reopened. The store closed by fire was open
when our telephone interviewer called in November
1992 but refused the interview. By the time of the
follow-up personal interview a mall fire had closed the
store.

775

nently closed stores but is treated as missing
for the temporarily closed stores. (Fulltime-equivalent [FTE] employment was calculated as the number of full-time workers
[including managers] plus 0.5 times the
number of part-time workers.)' Means are
presented separately for stores in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, along with t statistics
for the null hypothesis that the means are
equal in the two states.
Rows la-e show the distribution of stores
by chain and ownership status (companyowned versus franchisee-owned). The
Burger King, Roy Rogers, and Wendy's
stores in our sample have similar average
food prices, store hours, and employment
levels. The KFC stores are smaller and are
open for fewer hours. They also offer a
more expensive main course than stores in
the other chains (chicken vs, hamburgers).
In wave 1, average employment was 23.3
full-time equivalent workers per store in
Pennsylvania, compared with an average of
20.4 in New Jersey. Starting wages were
very similar among stores in the two states,
although the average price of a "full meal"
(medium soda, small fries, and an entree)
was significantly higher in New Jersey. There
were no significant cross-state differences in
average hours of operation, the fraction of
full-time workers, or the prevalence of bonus
programs to recruit new worker^.^
The average starting wage at fast-food
restaurants in New Jersey increased by 10
percent following the rise in the minimum
wage. Further insight into this change is
provided in Figure 1, which shows the distributions of starting wages in the two states
before and after the rise. In wave 1, the
distributions in New Jersey and Pennsylvania were very similar. By wave 2 virtually all

' w e discuss the sensitivity of our results to alternative assumptions on the measurement of employment
in Section 111-C.
' ~ h e s e programs offer current employees a cash
"bounty" for recruiting any new employee who stays
on the job for a minimum period of time. Typical
bounties are $50-$75. Recruiting programs that award
the recruiter with an "employee of the month" designation or other noncash bonuses are excluded from our
tabulations.

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

SEPTEMBER 1994

Stores in:
Variable

NJ

PA

ta

21.2
(0.94)
30.4
(2.8)
4.62
(0.04)
25.3
(4.9)
1.3
(1.3)
3.03
(0.07)
14.7
(0.3)
23.4
(4.9)

- 0.2

1. Distribution of Store Types (percentages):
a. Burger King
b. KFC
c. Roy Rogers
d. Wendy's
e. Company-owned
2. Means in Wave I:
a. FTE employment
b. Percentage full-time employees
c. Starting wage
d. Wage = $4.25 (percentage)

20.4
(0.51)
32.8
(1.3)
4.61
(0.02)
30.5
(2.5)

e. Price of full meal
f. Hours open (weekday)
g. Recruiting bonus
3. Means in Ware 2:
a. FTE employment
b. Percentage full-time employees
c. Starting wage
d. Wage = $4.25 (percentage)
e. Wage = $5.05 (percentage)
f. Price of full meal
g. Hours open (weekday)
h. Recruiting bonus

21.0
(0.52)
35.9
(1.4)
5.08
(0.01)
0.0
85.2
(2.0)
3.41
(0.04)
14.4
(0.2)
20.3
(2.3)

1.8
10.8

36.1
5.0
- 0.8
- 0.6

Notes: See text for definitions. Standard errors are given in parentheses.
aTest of equality of means in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.

restaurants in New Jersey that had been
paying less than $5.05 per hour reported a
starting wage equal to the new rate. Interestingly, the minimum-wage increase had no
apparent "spillover" on higher-wage restaurants in the state: the mean percentage wage
change for these stores was - 3.1 percent.

Despite the increase in wages, full-timeequivalent employment increased in New
Jersey relative to Pennsylvania. Whereas
New Jersey stores were initially smaller,
employment gains in New Jersey coupled
with losses in Pennsylvania led to a small
and statistically insignificant interstate

VOL. 84 NO. 4

CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT

February 1 9 9 2

Wage Range

November 1 9 9 2

Wage Range

New Jersey

Pennsylvania

FIGURE
1. DISTRIBUTION
OF STARTING
WAGERATES

778

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

difference in wave 2. Only two other variables show a relative change between waves
1 and 2: the fraction of full-time employees
and the price of a meal. Both variables
increased in New Jersey relative to Pennsylvania.
We can assess the reliability of our survey
questionnaire by comparing the responses
of 11 stores that were inadvertently interviewed twice in the first wave of the survey.10
Assuming that measurement errors in the
two interviews are independent of each
other and independent of the true variable,
the correlation between responses gives an
estimate of the "reliability ratio" (the ratio
of the variance of the signal to the combined variance of the signal and noise). The
estimated reliability ratios are fairly high,
ranging from 0.70 for full-time equivalent
employment to 0.98 for the price of a meal."
We have also checked whether stores with
missing data for any key variables are different from restaurants with complete responses. We find that stores with missing
data on employment, wages, or prices are
similar in other respects to stores with complete data. There is a significant size differential associated with the likelihood of the
store closing after wave 1. The six stores
that closed were smaller than other stores
(with an average employment of only 12.4
full-time-equivalent employees in wave 1).12
111. Employment Effects of the
Minimum-Wage Increase

A. Differences in Differences
Table 3 summarizes the levels and
changes in average employment per store in
10
These restaurants were interviewed twice because
their phone numbers appeared in more than one phone
book, and neither the interviewer nor the respondent
noticed that they were previously interviewed.
11
Similar reliability ratios for very similar questions
were obtained by Katz and Krueger (1992).
''A probit analysis of the probability of closure
shows that the initial size of the store is a significant
predictor of closure. The level of starting wages has a
numerically small and statistically insignificant coefficient in the probit model.

SEPTEMBER I994

our survey. We present data by state in
columns (i) and (ii), and for stores in New
Jersey classified by whether the starting
wage in wave 1 was exactly $4.25 per hour
[column (iv)] between $4.26 and $4.99 per
hour [column (v)] or $5.00 or more per hour
[column (vi)]. We also show the differences
in average employment between New Jersey
and Pennsylvania stores [column (iii)] and
between stores in the various wage ranges
in New Jersey [columns (viil-(viii)].
Row 3 of the table presents the changes
in average employment between waves 1
and 2. These entries are simply the differences between the averages for the two
waves (i.e., row 2 minus row 1). An alternative estimate of the change is presented in
row 4: here we have computed the change
in employment over the subsample of stores
that reported valid employment data in both
waves. We refer to this group of stores as
the balanced subsample. Finally, row 5 presents the average change in employment in
the balanced subsample, treating wave-2
employment at the four temporarily closed
stores as zero, rather than as missing.
As noted in Table 2, New Jersey stores
were initially smaller than their Pennsylvania counterparts but grew relative to Pennsylvania stores after the rise in the minimum wage. The relative gain (the "difference in differences" of the changes in
employment) is 2.76 FTE employees (or 13
percent), with a t statistic of 2.03. Inspection of the averages in rows 4 and 5 shows
that the relative change between New Jersey and Pennsylvania stores is virtually identical when the analysis is restricted to the
balanced subsample, and it is only slightly
smaller when wave-2 employment at the
temporarily closed stores is treated as zero.
Within New Jersey, employment expanded at the low-wage stores (those paying
$4.25 per hour in wave 1) and contracted at
the high-wage stores (those paying $5.00 or
more per hour). Indeed, the average change
in employment at the high-wage stores
( - 2.16 FTE employees) is almost identical
to the change among Pennsylvania stores
( - 2.28 FTE employees). Since high-wage
stores in New Jersey should have been

V O L . 84 NO. 4

CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT

largely unaffected by the new minimum
wage, this comparison provides a specification test of the validity of the Pennsylvania
control group. The test is clearly passed.
Regardless of whether the affected stores
are compared to stores in Pennsylvania or
high-wage stores in New Jersey, the estimated employment effect of the minimum
wage is similar.
The results in Table 3 suggest that employment contracted between February and
November of 1992 at fast-food stores that
were unaffected by the rise in the minimum
wage (stores in Pennsylvania and stores in
New Jersey paying $5.00 per hour or more
in wave 1). We suspect that the reason for
this contraction was the continued worsening of the economies of the middle-Atlantic
states during 1992.13 Unemployment rates
in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and New York
all trended upward between 1991 and 1993,
with a larger increase in New Jersey than
Pennsylvania during 1992. Since sales of
franchised fast-food restaurants are procyclical, the rise in unemployment would be
expected to lower fast-food employment in
the absence of other factors.14

B. Regression-Adjusted Models
The comparisons in Table 3 make no
allowance for other sources of variation in
employment growth, such as differences
across chains. These are incorporated in the
estimates in Table 4. The entries in this
table are regression coefficients from mod-

13
An alternative possibility is that seasonal factors
produce higher employment at fast-food restaurants in
February and March than in November and December.
An analysis of national employment data for food
preparation and service workers, however, shows higher
average employment in the fourth quarter than in the
first quarter.
14
To investigate the cyclicality of fast-food restaurant sales we regressed the year-to-year change in U.S.
sales of the McDonald's restaurant chain from
1976-1991 on the corresponding change in the unemployment rate. The regression results show that a
1-percentage-point increase in the unemployment rate
reduces sales by $257 million, with a t statistic of 3.0.

els of the form:
(la)

AE,=a+bXi+cNJi+~,

+

( l b ) AE, = a' + blXi clGAPi + E{
where AE, is the change in employment
from wave 1 to wave 2 at store i, Xi is a set
of characteristics of store i, and NJ, is a
dummy variable that equals 1 for stores in
New Jersey. GAP, is an alternative measure
of the impact of the minimum wage at store
i based on the initial wage at that store
(W,,):
GAP, = 0
=0

for stores in Pennsylvania
for stores in New Jersey with

for other stores in New Jersey.
GAP, is the proportional increase in wages
at store i necessary to meet the new minimum rate. Variation in GAP, reflects both
the New Jersey-Pennsylvania contrast and
differences within New Jersey based on reported starting wages in wave 1. Indeed, the
value of GAP, is a strong predictor of the
actual proportional wage change between
waves 1 and 2 (R* = 0.75), and conditional
on GAP, there is no difference in wage
behavior between stores in New Jersey and
Pennsylvania. l5
The estimate in column (i) of Table 4
is directly comparable to the simple
difference-in-differences of employment
changes in column (iv), row 4 of Table 3.
T h e discrepancy between the two
estimates is due to the restricted sample in
Table 4. In Table 4 and the remaining tables in this section we restrict our analysis
to the set of stores with available employment and wage data in both waves of the

1 5 regression
~
of the proportional wage change between waves 1 and 2 on GAP, has a coefficient of 1.03.

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVlEW
TABLE3-AVERAGE EMPLOYMENT
PER STOREBEFOREAND I
IN NEW JERSEYMINIMUM
WAGE

PA

Variable

(i)

Stores by state
Difference,
NJ-PA
NJ
(iii)
(ii)

SEPTEMBER 1994
~

E THE
R RISE

Stores in New Jersey a
Differences within N J ~
Wage =
Wage =
Wage r LowMidrangehigh
high
$4.25
$4.26-$4.99
$5.00
(vii)
(viii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

1. FTE employment before,
all available observations
2. FTE employment after,
all available observations
3. Change in mean FTE
employment
4. Change in mean FTE
employment, balanced
sample of storesC
5. Change in mean FTE
employment, setting
FTE at temporarily
closed stores to Od
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample consists of all stores with available data on employment. FTE
(full-time-equivalent) employment counts each part-time worker as half a full-time worker. Employment at six closed stores
is set to zero. Employment at four temporarily closed stores is treated as missing.
astares in New Jersey were classified by whether starting wage in wave 1 equals $4.25 per hour ( N = 101), is between
$4.26 and $4.99 per hour ( N = 140), or is $5.00 per hour or higher ( N = 73).
b ~ i f f e r e n c ein employment between low-wage ($4.25 per hour) and high-wage ( 2$5.00 per hour) stores; and difference
in employment between midrange ($4.26-$4.99 per hour) and high-wage stores.
'Subset of stores with available employment data in wave 1 and wave 2.
this row only, wave-2 employment at four temporarily closed stores is set to 0. Employment changes are based on the
subset of stores with available employment data in wave 1 and wave 2.

TABLE4-REDUCED-FORM MODELSFOR CHANGEIN EMPLOYMENT
Model
Independent variable

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

1. New Jersey dummy

2.33
(1.19)

2.30
(1.20)

-

-

-

15.65
(6.08)
no

14.92
(6.21)
yes

11.91
(7.39)
yes

2. Initial wage gapa

-

3. Controls for chain and
ownershipb
4. Controls for regionC
5. Standard error of regression
6. Probability value for controlsd

no

-

yes

Notes: Standard errors a r e given in parentheses. T h e sample consists of 357 stores
with available data o n employment and starting wages in waves 1 and 2. T h e
dependent variable in all models is change in F T E employment. T h e mean and
standard deviation of the dependent variable are -0.237 and 8.825, respectively. All
models include a n unrestricted constant (not reported).
aProportional increase in starting wage necessary to raise starting wage t o new
minimum rate. For stores in Pennsylvania the wage gap is 0.
b ~ h r e de ummy variables for chain type and whether or not the store is companyowned are included.
'Dummy variables for two regions of New Jersey and two regions of eastern
Pennsylvania are included.
d ~ r o b a b i l i t yv alue of joint F test for exclusion of all control variables.

VOL. 84 NO. 4

CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT

survey. This restriction results in a slightly
smaller estimate of the relative increase in
employment in New Jersey.
The model in column (ii) introduces a
set of four control variables: dummies for
three of the chains and another dummy for
company-owned stores. As shown by the
probability values in row 6, these covariates
add little to the model and have no effect
on the size of the estimated New Jersey
dummy.
The specifications in columns (iiil-(v) use
the GAP variable to measure the effect of
the minimum wage. This variable gives a
slightly better fit than the simple New Jersey dummy, although its implications for the
New Jersey-Pennsylvania comparison are
similar. The mean value of GAPi among
New Jersey stores is 0.11. Thus the estimate
in column (iii) implies a 1.72 increase in
FTE employment in New Jersey relative to
Pennsylvania.
Since GAP, varies within New Jersey, it is
possible to add both GAP, and NJ, to the
employment model. The estimated coefficient of the New Jersey dummy then provides a test of the Pennsylvania control
group. When we estimate these models, the
coefficient of the New Jersey dummy is insignificant (with t ratios of 0.3-0.7), implying that inferences about the effect of the
minimum wage are similar whether the
comparison is made across states or across
stores in New Jersey with higher and lower
initial wages.
An even stronger test is provided in column (v), where we have added dummies
representing three regions of New Jersey
(North, Central, and South) and two regions
of eastern Pennsylvania (Allentown-Easton
and the northern suburbs of Philadelphia).
These dummies control for any regions~ecificdemand shocks and identifv the effeet of the minimum wage by
employment changes at higher- and lowerwithin the same region of New
wage
Jersey. The probability value in row 6 shows
no evidence of regional components in employment growth. The addition of the region dummies attenuates the GAP coefficient and raises its standard error, however,
making it no longer possible to reject the

781

null hypothesis of a zero employment effect
of the minimum wage. One explanation for
this attenuation is the presence of measurement error in the starting wage. Even if
employment growth has no regional component, the addition of region dummies will
lead to some attenuation of the estimated
GAP coefficient if some of the true variation in GAP is explained by region. Indeed,
calculations based on the estimated reliability of the GAP variable (from the set of 11
double interviews) suggest that the fall in
the estimated GAP coefficient from column
(iv) to column (v) is just equal to the expected change attributable to measurement
error.16
We have also estimated the models in
Table 4 using as a dependent variable the
proportional change in employment at each
store.17 The estimated coefficients of the
New Jersey dummy and the GAP variable
are uniformly positive in these models but
insignificantly different from 0 at conventional levels. The implied employment effects of the minimum wage are also smaller
when the dependent variable is expressed in
proportional terms. For example, the GAP
coefficient in column (iii) of Table 4 implies
that the increase in minimum wages raised
employment at New Jersey stores that were
initially paying $4.25 per hour by 14 percent. The estimated GAP coefficient from a
corresponding proportional model implies
an effect of only 7 percent. The difference is
attributable to heterogeneity in the effect of
the minimum wage at larger and smaller
stores. Weighted versions of the proportional-change models (using initial employment as a weight) give rise to wage elastici-

16
In a regression model without other controls the
expected attenuation of the GAP coefficient due to
measurement error is the reliability ratio of GAP (yo),
which we estimate at 0.70. The expected attenuation
factor when region dummies are added to the model is
y l = (Yo- ~ 2 ) / ( 1 - ~ 2 ) where
,
~2
is the R-square
statistic of a regression of GAP on region effects (equal
to 0.30). Thus, we expect the estimated GAP coefficient to fall by a factor of Y I / Y O = 0.8 when region
dummies are added to a regression model.
" ~ h e s e specifications are reported in table 4 of
Card and Krueger (1993).

782

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

ties similar to the elasticities implied by the
estimates in Table 4 (see below).
C. Specification Tests
The results in Tables 3 and 4 seem to
contradict the standard prediction that a
rise in the minimum wage will reduce employment. Table 5 presents some alternative
specifications that probe the robustness of
this conclusion. For completeness, we report estimates of models for the change in
employment [columns (i) and (ii)] and estimates of models for the proportional change
in employment [columns (iii) and (iv)].18 The
first row of the table reproduces the "base
specification" from columns (ii) and (iv) of
Table 4. (Note that these models include
chain dummies and a dummy for companyowned stores). Row 2 presents an alternative set of estimates when we set wave-2
employment at the temporarily closed stores
to 0 (expanding our sample size by 4). This
change has a small attenuating effect on the
coefficient of the New Jersey dummy (since
all four stores are in New Jersey) but less
effect on the GAP coefficient (since the size
of GAP is uncorrelated with the probability
of a temporary closure within New Jersey).
Rows 3-5 present estimation results using alternative measures of full-time-equivalent employment. In row 3, employment is
redefined to exclude management employees. This change has no effect relative to
the base specification. In rows 4 and 5, we
include managers in FTE employment but
reweight part-time workers as either 40 percent or 60 percent of full-time workers (instead of 50 percent).19 These changes have

18

The proportional change in employment is defined as the change in employment divided by the
average level of employment in waves 1 and 2. This
results in very similar coefficients but smaller standard
errors than the alternative of dividing by wave-1 employment. For closed stores we set the proportional
change in employment to - 1.
19
Analysis of the 1991 Current Population Survey
reveals that part-time workers in the restaurant industry work about 46 percent as many hours as full-time
workers. Katz and Krueger (1992) report that the ratio
of part-time workers' hours to full-time workers' hours
in the fast-food industry is 0.57.

SEPTEMBER I994

little effect on the models for the level of
employment but yield slightly smaller point
estimates in the proportional-employmentchange models.
In row 6 we present estimates obtained
from a subsample that excludes 35 stores in
towns along the New Jersey shore. The exclusion of these stores, which may have a
different seasonal pattern than other stores
in our sample, leads to slightly larger minimum-wage effects. A similar finding emerges
in row 7 when we add a set of dummy
variables that indicate the week of the
wave-2 inter vie^.^'
As noted earlier, we made an extra effort
to obtain responses from New Jersey stores
in the first wave of our survey. The fraction
of stores called three or more times to obtain an interview was higher in New Jersey
than in Pennsylvania. To check the sensitivity of our results to this sampling feature,
we reestimated our models on a subsample
that excludes any stores that were called
back more than twice. The results, in row 8,
are very similar to the base specification.
Row 9 presents weighted estimation results for the proportional-employmentchange models, using as weights the initial
levels of employment in each store. Since
the proportional change in average employment is an employment-weighted average of
the proportional changes at each store, a
weighted version of the proportional-change
model should give rise to elasticities that
are similar to the implied elasticities arising
from the levels models. Consistent with this
expectation, the weighted estimates are
larger than the unweighted estimates, and
significantly different from 0 at conventional
levels. The weighted estimate of the New
Jersey dummy (0.13) implies a 13-percent
relative increase in New Jersey employment
-the same proportional employment effect
implied by the simple difference-in-differences in Table 3. Similarly, the weighted
estimate of the GAP coefficient in the
proportional-change model (0.81) is close to

20
We also added dummies for the interview dates
for the wave-1 survey, but these were insignificant and
did not change the estimated minimum-wage effects.

VOL. 84 NO. 4

783

CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT

Change in employment
NJ dummy
(i)

Gap measure
(ii)

2.30
(1.19)

14.92
(6.21)

10. Stores in towns around Newark'

-

33.75
(16.75)

11. Stores in towns around CamdenJ

-

10.91
(14.09)

12. Pennsylvania stores only

-

- 0.30
(22.00)

Specification
1. Base specification

Proportional change
in employment
NJ dummy
(iii)

Gap measure
(iv)

2. Treat four temporarily closed stores
as permanently closeda
3. Exclude managers in employment
countb
4. Weight part-time as 0.4 x full-timec
5. Weight part-time as 0.6 X full-timed
6. Exclude stores in NJ shore areae
7. Add controls for wave-2 interview
dateE
8. Exclude stores called more than twice
in wave lg
9. Weight by initial employmenth

Notes: Standard errors are given in parentheses. Entries represent estimated coefficient of New Jersey dummy
[columns (i) and (iii)] or initial wage gap [columns (ii) and (iv)] in regression models for the change in employment
or the percentage change in employment. All models also include chain dummies and an indicator for companyowned stores.
aWave-2 employment at four temporarily closed stores is set to 0 (rather than missing).
b~ull-time quivalent employment excludes managers and assistant managers.
CFull-time equivalent employment equals number of managers, assistant managers, and full-time nonmanagement workers, plus 0.4 times the number of part-time nonmanagement workers.
d~ull-timeequivalent employment equals number of managers, assistant managers, and full-time nonmanagement workers, plus 0.6 times the number of part-time nonmanagement workers.
eSample excludes 35 stores located in towns along the New Jersey shore.
' ~ o d e l sinclude three dummy variables identifying week of wave-2 interview in November-December 1992.
gSample excludes 70 stores (69 in New Jersey) that were contacted three or more times before obtaining the
wave-1 interview.
h~egressionmodel is estimated by weighted least squares, using employment in wave 1 as a weight.
i
. Subsample of 51 stores in towns around Newark.
Subsample of 54 stores in town around Camden.
Subsample of Pennsylvania stores only. Wage gap is defined as percentage increase in starting wage necessary
to raise starting wage to $5.05.

784

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

the implied elasticity of employment with
respect to wages from the basic levels specification in row 1, column (iiI2l These findings suggest that the proportional effect of
the rise in the minimum wage was concentrated among larger stores.
One explanation for our finding that a
rise in the minimum wage has a positive
employment effect is that unobserved demand shocks within New Jersey outweighed
the negative employment effect of the minimum wage. To address this possibility, rows
10 and 11 present estimation results based
on subsamples of stores in two narrowly
defined areas: towns around Newark (row
10) and towns around Camden (row 11). In
each case the sample area is identified by
the first three digits of the store's zip code.22
Within both areas the change in employment is positively correlated with the GAP
variable, although in neither case is the
effect statistically significant. To the extent
that fast-food product market conditions are
constant within local areas, these results
suggest that our findings are not driven by
unobserved demand shocks. Our analysis of
price changes (reported below) also supports this conclusion.
A final specification check is presented in
row 12 of Table 5. In this row we exclude
stores in New Jersey and (incorrectly) define the GAP variable for Pennsylvania
stores as the proportional increase in wages
necessary to raise the wage to $5.05 per
hour. In principle the size of the wage gap
for stores in Pennsylvania should have no
systematic relation with employment growth.
In practice, this is the case. There is no
indication that the wage gap is spuriously
related to employment growth.

21~ssumingaverage employment of 20.4 in New
Jersey, the 14.92 GAP coefficient in row 1, column (ii)
im lies an employment elasticity of 0.73.
"The "070" three-digit zip-code area (around
Newark) and the "080" three-digit zip-code area
(around Camden) have by far the largest numbers of
stores among three-digit zip-code areas in New Jersey,
and together they account for 36 percent of New Jersey
stores in our sample.

SEPTEMBER 1994

We have also investigated whether the
first-differenced specification used in our
employment models is appropriate. A
first-differenced model implies that the level
of employment in period t is related to the
lagged level of employment with a coefficient of 1. If short-run employment fluctuations are smoothed, however, the true coefficient of lagged employment may be less
than 1. Imposing the assumption of a unit
coefficient may then lead to biases. To test
the first-differenced specification we reestimated models for the change in employment including wave-1 employment as an
additional explanatory variable. To overcome any mechanical correlation between
base-period employment and the change in
employment (attributable to measurement
error) we instrumented wave-1 employment
with the number of cash registers in the
store in wave 1 and the number of registers
in the store that were open at 11:OO A.M. In
all of the specifications the coefficient of
wave-1 employment is close to zero. For
example, in a specification including the
GAP variable and ownership and chain
dummies, the coefficient of wave-1 employment is 0.04, with a standard error of 0.24.
We conclude that the first-differenced specification is appropriate.
D. Full-Time and Part-Time Substitution

Our analysis so far has concentrated on
full-time-equivalent employment and ignored possible changes in the distribution
of full- and part-time workers. An increase
in the minimum wage could lead to an increase in full-time employment relative to
part-time employment for at least two reasons. First, in a conventional model one
would expect a minimum-wage increase to
induce employers to substitute skilled workers and capital for minimum-wage workers.
Full-time workers in fast-food restaurants
are typically older and may well possess
higher skills than part-time workers. Thus, a
conventional model predicts that stores may
respond to an increase in the minimum
wage by increasing the proportion of fulltime workers. Nevertheless, 81 percent of
restaurants paid full-time and part-time

VOL. 84 NO. 4

CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT

Mean change in outcome
Outcome measure

NJ
(i)

PA
(ii)

NJ - PA
(iii)

785

Regression of change in
outcome variable on:
NJ dummy
(iv)

Wage gapa
(v)

Wage gapb
(vi)

Store Characteristics:
1. Fraction full-time workersc (percentage)

2. Number of hours open per weekday
3. Number of cash registers

4. Number of cash registers open
at 11:OO A.M.
Employee Meal Programs:

5. Low-price meal program (percentage)
6. Free meal program (percentage)

7. Combination of low-price and free
meals (percentage)
Wage Profile:
8. Time to first raise (weeks)
9. Usual amount of first raise (cents)
10. Slope of wage profile (percent
per week)

Notes: Entries in columns (i) and (ii) represent mean changes in the outcome variable indicated by the row heading
for stores with available data on the outcome in waves 1 and 2. Entries in columns (iv)-(vi) represent estimated
regression coefficients of indicated variable (NJ dummy or initial wage gap) in models for the change in the
outcome variable. Regression models include chain dummies and an indicator for company-owned stores.
aThe wage gap is the proportional increase in starting wage necessary to raise the wage to the new minimum
rate. For stores in Pennsylvania, the wage gap is zero.
b ~ o d e lin
s column (vi) include dummies for two regions of New Jersey and two regions of eastern Pennsylvania.
'Fraction of part-time employees in total full-time-equivalent employment.

workers exactly the same starting wage in
wave 1 of our survey.23 This suggests either
that full-time workers have the same skills
as part-time workers or that equity concerns
lead restaurants to pay equal wages for unequally productive workers. If full-time

231n the other 19 percent of stores, full-time workers
are paid more, typically 10 percent more.

workers are more productive (but equally
paid), there may be a second reason for
stores to substitute full-time workers for
part-time workers; namely, a minimum-wage
increase enables the industry to attract more
full-time workers, and stores would naturally want to hire a greater proportion of
full-time workers if they are more productive.
Row 1 of Table 6 presents the mean
changes in the proportion of full-time work-

786

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

ers in New Jersey and Pennsylvania between waves 1 and 2 of our survey, and
coefficient estimates from regressions of the
change in the proportion of full-time workers on the wage-gap variable, chain dummies, a company-ownership dummy, and region dummies [in column ( 4 1 . The results
are ambiguous. The fraction of full-time
workers increased in New Jersey relative to
Pennsylvania by 7.3 percent (t ratio = 1.841,
but regressions on the wage-gap variable
show no significant shift in the fraction of
full-time workers.24

E. Other Employment-Related Measures
Rows 2-4 of Table 6 present results for
other outcome variables that we expect to
be related to the level of restaurant employment. In particular, we examine whether
the rise in the minimum wage is associated
with a change in the number of hours a
restaurant is open on a weekday, the number of cash registers in the restaurant, and
the number of cash registers typically in
operation in the restaurant at 11:OO A.M.
Consistent with our employment results,
none of these variables shows a statistically
significant decline in New Jersey relative to
Pennsylvania. Similarly, regressions including the gap variable provide no evidence
that the minimum-wage increase led to a
systematic change in any of these variables
[see columns (v) and (vi)].
IV. Nonwage Offsets

One explanation of our finding that a rise
in the minimum wage does not lower employment is that restaurants can offset the
effect of the minimum wage by reducing
nonwage compensation. For example, if
workers value fringe benefits and wages
equally, employers can simply reduce the
level of fringe benefits by the amount of the
minimum-wage increase, leaving their em-

2 4 ~ i t h i nNew Jersey, the fraction of full-time employees increased about as quickly at stores with higher
and lower wages in wave 1.

SEPTEMBER 1994

ployment costs unchanged. The main fringe
benefits for fast-food employees are free
and reduced-price meals. In the first wave
of our survey about 19 percent of fast-food
restaurants offered workers free meals. 72
percent offered reduced-price meals, a i d 9
percent offered a combination of both free
and reduced-price meals. Low-price meals
are an obvious fringe benefit to cut if the
minimum-wage increase forces restaurants
to pay higher wages.
Rows 5 and 6 of Table 6 present estimates of the effect of the minimum-wage
increase on the incidence of free meals and
reduced-price meals. The proportion of restaurants offering reduced-price meals fell
in both New Jersey and Pennsylvania after
the minimum wage increased, with a somewhat greater decline in New Jersey. Contrary to an offset story, however, the reduction in reduced-price meal programs was
accompanied by an increase in the fraction
of stores offering free meals. Relative to
stores in Pennsylvania, New Jersey employers actually shifted toward more generous
fringe benefits (i.e., free meals rather than
reduced-price meals). However, the relative
shift is not statistically significant.
We continue to find a statistically insignificant effect of the minimum-wage increase on the likelihood of receiving free or
reduced-price meals in columns (v) and (vi),
where we report coefficient estimates of the
GAP variable from regression models for
the change in the incidence of these programs. The results provide no evidence that
employers offset the minimum-wage increase by reducing free or reduced-price
meals.
Another possibility is that employers responded to the increase in the minimum
wage by reducing on-the-job training and
flattening the tenure-wage profile (see
Jacob Mincer and Linda Leighton, 1981).
Indeed, one manager told our interviewer in
wave 1that her workers were forgoing ordinary scheduled raises because the minimum
wage was about to rise, and this would
provide a raise for all her workers. To determine whether this phenomenon occurred
more generally, we analyzed store managers' responses to questions on the amount

VOL. 84 NO. 4

CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT

of time before a normal wage increase and
the usual amount of such raises. In rows 8
and 9 we report the average changes between waves 1 and 2 for these two variables,
as well as regression coefficients from models that include the wage-gap variable.25Although the average time to the first pay
raise increased by 2.5 weeks in New Jersey
relative to Pennsylvania, the increase is not
statistically significant. Furthermore, there
is only a trivial difference in the relative
change in the amount of the first pay increment between New Jersey and Pennsylvania
stores.
Finally, we examined a related variable:
the "slope" of the wage profile, which we
measure by the ratio of the typical first raise
to the amount of time until the first raise is
given. As shown in row 10, the slope of the
wage profile flattened in both New Jersey
and Pennsylvania, with no significant relative difference between states. The change
in the slope is also uncorrelated with the
GAP variable. In summary, we can find no
indication that New Jersey employers
changed either their fringe benefits or their
wage profiles to offset the rise in the minimum wage.26
V. Price Effects of the Minimum-Wage
Increase

A final issue we examine is the effect of
the minimum wage on the prices of meals at
fast-food restaurants. A competitive model
of the fast-food industry implies that an
increase in the minimum wage will lead to
an increase in product prices. If we assume
constant returns to scale in the industry, the
increase in price should be proportional to
the share of minimum-wage labor in total

2 5 ~ nwave 1, the average time to a first wage increase was 18.9 weeks, and the average amount of the
first increase was $0.21 per hour.
2 6 ~ a t aznd Krueger (1992) report that a significant
fraction of fast-food stores in Texas responded to an
increase in the minimum wage by raising wages for
workers who were initially earning more than the new
minimum rate. Our results on the slope of the tenure
profile are consistent with their findings.

787

factor cost. The average restaurant in New
Jersey initially paid about half its workers
less than the new minimum wage. If wages
rose by roughly 15 percent for these workers, and if labor's share of total costs is 30
percent, we would expect prices to rise by
about 2.2 percent ( = 0.15 X 0.5 X 0.3) due to
the minimum-wage rise.27
In each wave of our survey we asked
managers for the prices of three standard
items: a medium soda, a small order of
french fries, and a main course. The main
course was a basic hamburger at Burger
King, Roy Rogers, and Wendy's restaurants,
and two pieces of chicken at KFC stores.
We define "full meal" price as the after-tax
price of a medium soda, a small order of
french fries, and a main course.
Table 7 presents reduced-form estimates
of the effect of the minimum-wage increase
on prices. The dependent variable in these
models is the change in the logarithm of the
price of a full meal at each store. The key
independent variable is either a dummy indicating whether the store is located in New
Jersey or the proportional wage increase
required to meet the minimum wage (the
GAP variable defined above).
The estimated New Jersey dummy in column (i) shows that after-tax meal prices
rose 3.2-percent faster in New Jersey than
in Pennsylvania between February and
November 1 9 9 2 . ~ T
~ he effect is slightly
larger controlling for chain and companyownership [see column ($1. Since the
New Jersey sales tax rate fell by 1 percentage point between the waves of our survey,
these estimates suggest that pretax prices
rose 4-percent faster as a result of the

" ~ c c o r d i n ~to the McDonald's Corporation 1991
Annual Report. payroll and benefits are 31.3 percent of
operating costs at company-owned stores. This calculation is only approximate because minimum-wage workers make up less than half of payroll even though they
are about half of workers, and because a rise in the
minimum wage causes some employers to increase the
pay of other higher-wage workers in order to maintain
relative pay differentials.
he effect is attributable to a 2.0-percent increase
in prices in New Jersey and a 1.0-percent decrease in
prices in Pennsylvania.

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

SEPTEMBER 1994

TABLE7-REDUCED-FORMMODELSFOR CHANGE
IN THE PRICEOF A FULLMEAL
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Dependent variable: change in the log price
of a full meal
Independent variable

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

1. New Jersey dummy

0.033
(0.014)

0.037
(0.014)

-

-

-

2. Initial wage gapa

-

-

0.077
(0.075)

0.146
(0.074)

0.063
(0.089)

3. Controls for chain andb
ownership
4. Controls for regionC

no

yes

no

yes

Yes

no

no

no

no

yes

5. Standard error of regression

0.101

0.097

0.102

0.098

0.097

Notes: Standard errors are given in parentheses. Entries are estimated regression
coefficients for models fit to the change in the log price of a full meal (entrCe, medium
soda, small fries). The sample contains 315 stores with valid data on prices, wages, and
employment for waves 1 and 2. The mean and standard deviation of the dependent
variable are 0.0173 and 0.1017, respectively.
aProportional increase in starting wage necessary to raise the wage to the new
minimum-wage rate. For stores in Pennsylvania the wage gap is 0.
bThree dummy variables for chain type and whether or not the store is companyowned are included.
'Dummy variables for two regions of New Jersey and two regions of eastern
Pennsylvania are included.

minimum-wage increase in New Jerseyslightly more than the increase needed to
pass through the cost increase caused by the
minimum-wage hike.
The pattern of price changes within New
Jersey is less consistent with a simple
" pass-through" view of minimum-wage cost
increases. In fact, meal prices rose at
approximately the same rate at stores in
New Jersey with differing levels of initial
wages. Inspection of the estimated GAP
coefficients in column (v) of Table 7 confirms that within regions of New Jersey, the
GAP variable is statistically insignificant.
In sum, these results provide mixed evidence that higher minimum wages result in
higher fast-food prices. The strongest evidence emerges from a comparison of New
Jersey and Pennsylvania stores. The magnitude of the price increase is consistent with
predictions from a conventional model of a
competitive industry. On the other hand, we
find no evidence that prices rose faster
among stores in New Jersey that were most
affected by the rise in the minimum wage.

One potential explanation for the latter
finding is that stores in New Jersey compete
in the same product market. As a result,
restaurants that are most affected by the
minimum wage are unable to increase their
product prices faster than their competitors.
In contrast, stores in New Jersey and Pennsylvania are in separate product markets,
enabling prices to rise in New Jersey relative to Pennsylvania when overall costs rise
in New Jersey. Note that this explanation
seems to rule out the possibility that storespecific demand shocks can account for the
anomalous rise in employment at stores in
New Jersey with lower initial wages.
VI. Store Openings

An important potential effect of higher
minimum wages is to discourage the opening of new businesses. Although our sample
design allows us to estimate the effect of the
minimum wage on existing restaurants in
New Jersey, we cannot address the effect of
the higher minimum wage on potential

VOL. 84 NO. 4

CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT

entrants.29 To assess the likely size of such
an effect, we used national restaurant directories for the McDonald's restaurant chain
to compare the numbers of operating
restaurants and the numbers of newly
opened restaurants in different states over
the 1986-1991 period. Many states raised
their minimum wages during this period. In
addition, the federal minimum wage increased in the early 1990's from $3.35 to
$4.25, with differing effects in different states
depending on the level of wages in the
state. These policies create an opportunity
to measure the impact of minimum-wage
laws on store opening rates across states.
The results of our analysis are presented
in Table 8. We regressed the growth rate in
the number of McDonald's stores in each
state on two alternative measures of the
minimum wage in the state and a set of
other control variables (population growth
and the change in the state unemployment
rate). The first minimum-wage measure is
the fraction of workers in the state's retail
trade industry in 1986 whose wages fell between the existing federal minimum wage in
1986 ($3.35 per hour) and the effective minimum wage in the state in April 1990 (the
maximum of the federal minimum wage and
the state minimum wages as of April 1990)."
The second is the ratio of the state's effective minimum wage in 1990 to the average
hourly wage of retail trade workers in the
state in 1986. Both of these measures are
designed to gauge the degree of upward
wage pressure exerted by state or federal
minimum-wage changes between 1986 and
1990.
The results provide no evidence that
higher minimum-wage rates (relative to the
retail-trade wages in a state) exert a nega-

29
Direct inquiries to the chains in our sample revealed that Wendy's opened two stores in New Jersey
in 1992 and one store in Pennsylvania. The other
chains were unwilling to provide information on new
openings.
30
We used the 1986 Current Population Survey
(merged monthly file) to construct the minimum-wage
variables. State minimum-wage rates in 1990 were obtained from the Bureau of National Affairs Labor
Relations Reporter Wages and Hours Manual (undated).

789

tive effect on either the net number of
restaurants or the rate of new openings. To
the contrary, all the estimates show positice
effects of higher minimum wages on the
number of operating or newly opened stores,
although many of the point estimates are
insignificantly different from zero. While this
evidence is limited, we conclude that the
effects of minimum wages on fast-food store
opening rates are probably small.
VII. Broader Evidence on Employment
Changes in New Jersey

Our establishment-level analysis suggests
that the rise in the minimum wage in New
Jersey may have increased employment in
the fast-food industry. Is this just an anomaly
associated with our particular sample, or a
phenomenon unique to the fast-food industry? Data from the monthly Current Population Survey (CPS) allow us to compare
state-wide employment trends in New Jersey and the surrounding states, providing a
check on the interpretation of our findings.
Using monthly CPS files for 1991 and 1992,
we computed employment-population rates
for teenagers and adults (age 25 and older)
for New Jersey, Pennsylvania, New York,
and the entire United States. Since the New
Jersey minimum wage rose on April 1, 1992,
we computed the employment rates for
April-December of both 1991 and 1992.
The relative changes in employment in New
Jersey and the surrounding states then give
an indication of the effect of the new law.
A comparison of changes in adult employment rates show that the New Jersey
labor market fared slightly worse over the
1991-1992 period than either the U.S. labor
market as a whole or labor markets in
Pennsylvania or New York (see Card and
Krueger, 1993 table 9l3' Among teenagers,
however, the situation was reversed. In New
Jersey, teenage employment rates fell by 0.7
percent from 1991 to 1992. In New York,

31
The employment rate of individuals age 25 and
older fell by 2.6 percent in New Jersey between 1991
and 1992, while it rose by 0.3 percent in Pennsylvania,
and fell by 0.2 percent in the United States as a whole.

790

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

Dependent variable: proportional
increase in number of stores
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

Independent variable

SEPTEMBER 1994

Dependent variable:
(number of newly opened stores)+
(number in 1986)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)

Minimum- Wage Variable:
1. Fraction of retail workers
in affected wage range 1986"
2. (State minimum wage in 1991)+
(average retail wage in 1986Ib

0.33
(0.20)
-

0.38
(0.22)

0.13
(0.19)
-

-

0.37
(0.22)

-

0.47
(0.22)

-

0.47
(0.23)

1.03
(0.23)
-1.40
(0.61)
0.068

-

-

-

-

0.088

0.088

0.16
(0.21)
-

0.56
(0.24)

Other Control Variables:
3. Proportional growth in
population, 1986-1991
4. Change in unemployment
rates, 1986-1991
5. Standard error of regression

-

-

-

-

0.083

0.083

0.88
(0.23)
-1.78
(0.62)
0.071

0.86
(0.25)
- 1.85
(0.68)
0.077

1.04
(0.25)
- 1.40
(0.65)
0.073

Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample contains 51 state-level observations (including the
District of Columbia) on the number of McDonald's restaurants open in 1986 and 1991. The dependent variable in
columns (i)-(iv) is the proportional increase in the number of restaurants open. The mean and standard deviation
are 0.246 and 0.085, respectively. The dependent variable in columns (v)-(viii) is the ratio of the number of new
stores opened between 1986 and 1991 to the number open in 1986. The mean and standard deviation are 0.293 and
0.091, respectively. All regressions are weighted by the state population in 1986.
aFraction of all workers in retail trade in the state in 1986 earning an hourly wage between $3.35 per hour and
the "effective" state minimum wage in 1990 (i.e., the maximum of the federal minimum wage in 1990 ($3.80) and
the state minimum wage as of April 1, 1990).
b ~ a x i m u mof state and federal minimum wage as of April 1, 1990, divided by the average hourly wage of
workers in retail trade in the state in 1986.

Pennsylvania, and the United States as a
whole, teenage employment rates dropped
faster. Relative to teenagers in Pennsylvania, for example, the teenage employment
rate in New Jersey rose by 2.0 percentage
points. While this point estimate is consistent with our findings for the fast-food industry, the standard error is too large (3.2
percent) to allow any confident assessment.
VIII. Interpretation

As in the earlier study by Katz and
Krueger (1992), our empirical findings on
the effects of the New Jersey minimum wage
are inconsistent with the predictions of a
conventional competitive model of the fastfood industry. Our employment results are
consistent with several alternative models,
although none of these models can also
explain the apparent rise in fast-food prices
in New Jersey. In this section we briefly

summarize the predictions of the standard
model and some simple alternatives, and we
highlight the difficulties posed by our findings.
A. Standard Competitive Model
A standard competitive model predicts
that establishment-level employment will fall
if the wage is exogenously raised. For an
entire industry, total employment is predicted to fall, and product price is predicted
to rise in response to an increase in a binding minimum wage. Estimates from the
time-series literature on minimum-wage effects can be used to get a rough idea of the
elasticity of low-wage employment to the
minimum wage. The surveys by Brown et al.
(1982. 1983) conclude that a 10-~ercentincrease in the coverage-adjusted minimum
wage will reduce teenage employment rates
by 1-3 percent. Since this effect is for all

VOL. 84 NO. 4

CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT

teenagers, and not just those employed in
low-wage industries, it is surely a lower
bound on the magnitude of the effect for
fast-food workers. The 18-percent increase
in the New Jersey minimum wage is therefore predicted to reduce employment at
fast-food stores by 0.4-1.0 employees per
store. Our empirical results clearly reject
the upper range of these estimates, although we cannot reject a small negative
effect in some of our specifications.
A possible defense of the competitive
model is that unobserved demand shocks
affected certain stores in New Jerseyspecifically, those stores that were initially
paying wages less than $5.00 per hour. However, such localized demand shocks should
also affect product prices. (In fact, in a
competitive model, product demand shocks
work through a rise in prices.) Although
lower-wage stores in New Jersey had relative employment gains, they did not have
relative price increases. Furthermore, our
analysis of employment changes in two major suburban areas (around Newark and
Camden) reveals that, even within local
areas, employment rose faster at the stores
that had to increase wages the most because
of the new minimum wage.
B. Alternative Models
An alternative to the conventional competitive model is one in which firms are
price-takers in the product market but have
some degree of market power in the labor
market. If fast-food stores face an upwardsloping labor-supply schedule, a rise in the
minimum wage can potentially increase employment at affected firms and in the industry as a whole.32
This same basic insight emerges from an
equilibrium search model in which firms
post wages and employees search among
posted offers (see Dale T. Mortensen, 1988).
Kenneth Burdett and Mortensen (1989) de-

" ~ a n i e l G. Sullivan (1989) and Michael R Ransom
(1993) present empirical results for nurses and university teachers that suggest monopsony-like behavior of
employers.

791

rive the equilibrium wage distribution for a
noncooperative wage-search/wage-posting
model and show that the imposition of a
binding minimum wage can increase both
wages and employment relative to the initial
equilibrium. Furthermore, their model predicts that the minimum wage will increase
employment the most at firms that initially
paid the lowest wages.
Although monopsonistic and job-search
models provide a potential explanation for
the observed employment effects of the New
Jersey minimum wage, they cannot explain
the observed price effects. In these models,
industry prices should have fallen in New
Jersey relative to Pennsylvania, and at lowwage stores in New Jersey relative to highwage stores in New Jersey. Neither prediction is confirmed: indeed, prices rose faster
in New Jersey than in Pennsylvania, although at about the same rate at high- and
low-wage stores in New Jersey. Another
puzzle for equilibrium search models is the
absence of wage increases at firms that were
initially paying $5.05 or more per hour.
The strict link between the employment
and price effects of a rise in the minimum
wage may be broken if fast-food stores can
vary the quality of service (e.g., the length of
the queue at peak hours, or the cleanliness
of stores). Another possibility is that stores
altered the relative prices of their various
menu items. Comparisons of price changes
for the three items in our survey show slight
declines (-1.5 percent) in the price of
french fries and soda in New Jersey relative
to Pennsylvania, coupled with a relative increase (8 percent) in entrCe prices. These
limited data suggest a possible role for relative price changes within the fast-food industry following the rise in the minimum
wage.
One way to test a monopsony model is to
identify stores that were initially "supplyconstrained" in the labor market and test
for employment gains at these stores relative to other stores. A potential indicator of
market power is the use of recruitment
bonuses. As we noted in Table 2, about 25
percent of stores in wave 1 were offering
cash bonuses to employees who helped find
a new worker. We compared employment

792

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

changes at New Jersey stores that were offering recruitment bonuses in wave 1, and
also interacted the GAP variable with a
dummy for recruitment bonuses in several
employment-change models. We do not find
faster (or slower) employment growth at the
New Jersey stores that were initially using
recruitment bonuses, or any evidence that
the GAP variable had a larger effect for
stores that were using bonuses.
IX. Conclusions

Contrary to the central prediction of the
textbook model of the minimum wage, but
consistent with a number of recent studies
based on cross-sectional time-series comparisons of affected and unaffected markets
or employers, we find no evidence that the
rise in New Jersey's minimum wage reduced
employment at fast-food restaurants in the
state. Regardless of whether we compare
stores in New Jersey that were affected by
the $5.05 minimum to stores in eastern
Pennsylvania (where the minimum wage was
constant at $4.25 per hour) or to stores in
New Jersey that were initially paying $5.00
per hour or more (and were largely unaffected by the new law), we find that the
increase in the minimum wage increased
employment. We present a wide variety of
alternative specifications to probe the robustness of this conclusion. None of the
alternatives shows a negative employment
effect. We also check our findings for the
fast-food industry by comparing changes in
teenage employment rates in New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, and New York in the year
following the increase in the minimum wage.
Again, these results point toward a relative
increase in employment of low-wage workers in New Jersey. We also find no evidence
that minimum-wage increases negatively
affect the number of McDonald's outlets
opened in a state.
Finally, we find that prices of fast-food
meals increased in New Jersey relative to
Pennsylvania, suggesting that much of the
burden of the minimum-wage rise was
passed on to consumers. Within New Jersey, however, we find no evidence that prices
increased more in stores that were most

SEPTEMBER 1994

affected by the minimum-wage rise. Taken
as a whole, these findings are difficult to
explain with the standard competitive model
or with models in which employers face
supply constraints (e.g., monopsony or equilibrium search models).
REFERENCES
Brown, Charles; Gilroy, Curtis and Kohen, Andrew. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage

on Employment and Unemployment."
Journal of Economic Literature, June 1982,
20(2), pp. 487-528.
. "Time Series Evidence on the Effect of the Minimum Wage on Youth
Employment and Unemployment." Journal of Human Resources, Winter 1983,
18(1), pp. 3-31.
Burdett, Kenneth and Mortensen, Dale T.

"Equilibrium Wage Differentials and
Employer Size." Center for Mathematical
Studies in Economics and Management
Science Discussion Paper No. 860, Northwestern University, October 1989.
Bureau of National Affairs. Daily Labor Report. Washington, DC: Bureau of National Affairs, 5 May 1990.
. Labor Relations Reporter Wages and
Hours Manual. Washington, DC: Bureau
of National Affairs, irregular.
Card, David. "Using Regional Variation in
Wages To Measure the Effects of the
Federal Minimum Wage." Industrial and
Labor Relations Reuiew, October 1992a,
46(1), pp. 22-37.
. "Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment? A Case Study of California,
1987-89." Industrial and Labor Relations
Reuiew, October 1992b, 46(1), pp. 38-54.
Card, David and Krueger, Alan B. "Minimum
Wages and Employment: A Case Study of
the Fast Food Industry in New Jersey and
Pennsylvania." National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No. 4509, October 1993.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Krueger, Alan B. "The
Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast
Food Industry." Industrial and Labor Relations Reuiew, October 1992, 46(1), pp.
6-21.

VOL. 84 NO. 4

CARD AND KRUEGER: MINIMUM WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT

Lester, Richard A. "Employment Effects of

Minimum Wages." Industrial and Labor
Relations Reuiew, January 1960, 13, pp.
254-64.
. The economics of labor, 2nd Ed.
New York: Macmillan, 1964.
Machin, Stephen and Manning, Alan. "The
Effects of Minimum Wages on Wage Dispersion and Employment: Evidence from
the U.K. Wage Councils." Industrial and
Labor Relations Reuiew, January 1994,
47(2), pp. 319-29.
McDonald's Corporation. 1991 Annual report.
Chicago, 1991.
Mincer, Jacob and Leighton, Linda. "The Effects of Minimum Wages on Human Capital Formation," in Simon Rottenberg,
ed., The economics of legal minimum
wages. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute, 1981, pp. 155-73.
Mortensen, Dale T. "Equilibrium Wage Distributions: A Synthesis." Center for
Mathematical Studies in Economics and

793

Management Science Discussion Paper
No. 811, Northwestern University, March
1988.
Ransom, Michael R. "Seniority and Monopsony in the Academic Labor Market."
American Economic Reuiew, March 1993,
83(1), pp. 221-33.
Stigler, George J. "The Economics of Minimum Wage Legislation." American Economic Reciew, June 1946, 36(3), pp.
358-65.
Sullivan, Daniel G. "Monopsony Power in the
Market for Nurses." Journal of Law and
Economics, October 1989, Part 2, 32(2),
pp. S135-78.
U.S. Department of Commerce. 1987 Census of
retail trade: Miscellaneous subjects. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office, October 1990.
Wellington, Alison J. "Effects of the Minimum Wage on the Employment Status of
Youths: An Update." Journal of Human
Resources, Winter 1991, 26(1), pp. 27-46.

http://www.jstor.org

LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 4 -

You have printed the following article:
Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey
and Pennsylvania
David Card; Alan B. Krueger
The American Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 4. (Sep., 1994), pp. 772-793.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28199409%2984%3A4%3C772%3AMWAEAC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-O

This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.

[Footnotes]
1

The Effect of The Minimum Wage on Employment and Unemployment
Charles Brown; Curtis Gilroy; Andrew Kohen
Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 20, No. 2. (Jun., 1982), pp. 487-528.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-0515%28198206%2920%3A2%3C487%3ATEOTMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
1

Time-Series Evidence of the Effect of the Minimum Wage on Youth Employment and
Unemployment
Charles Brown; Curtis Gilroy; Andrew Kohen
The Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 18, No. 1. (Winter, 1983), pp. 3-31.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-166X%28198324%2918%3A1%3C3%3ATEOTEO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q
1

Effects of the Minimum Wage on the Employment Status of Youths: An Update
Alison J. Wellington
The Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 26, No. 1. (Winter, 1991), pp. 27-46.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-166X%28199124%2926%3A1%3C27%3AEOTMWO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-5

NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.

http://www.jstor.org

LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 2 of 4 -

3

The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast-Food Industry
Lawrence F. Katz; Alan B. Krueger
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Oct., 1992), pp. 6-21.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199210%2946%3A1%3C6%3ATEOTMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S
11

The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast-Food Industry
Lawrence F. Katz; Alan B. Krueger
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Oct., 1992), pp. 6-21.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199210%2946%3A1%3C6%3ATEOTMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S
19

The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast-Food Industry
Lawrence F. Katz; Alan B. Krueger
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Oct., 1992), pp. 6-21.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199210%2946%3A1%3C6%3ATEOTMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S
26

The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast-Food Industry
Lawrence F. Katz; Alan B. Krueger
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Oct., 1992), pp. 6-21.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199210%2946%3A1%3C6%3ATEOTMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S
32

Monopsony Power in the Market for Nurses
Daniel Sullivan
Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 32, No. 2, Part 2, Empirical Approaches to Market Power: A
Conference Sponsored by the University of Illinois and the Federal Trade Commission. (Oct., 1989),
pp. S135-S178.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2186%28198910%2932%3A2%3CS135%3AMPITMF%3E2.0.CO%3B2-1
32

Seniority and Monopsony in the Academic Labor Market
Michael R. Ransom
The American Economic Review, Vol. 83, No. 1. (Mar., 1993), pp. 221-233.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28199303%2983%3A1%3C221%3ASAMITA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-J

NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.

http://www.jstor.org

LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 3 of 4 -

References
The Effect of The Minimum Wage on Employment and Unemployment
Charles Brown; Curtis Gilroy; Andrew Kohen
Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 20, No. 2. (Jun., 1982), pp. 487-528.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-0515%28198206%2920%3A2%3C487%3ATEOTMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C

Time-Series Evidence of the Effect of the Minimum Wage on Youth Employment and
Unemployment
Charles Brown; Curtis Gilroy; Andrew Kohen
The Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 18, No. 1. (Winter, 1983), pp. 3-31.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-166X%28198324%2918%3A1%3C3%3ATEOTEO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q

Using Regional Variation in Wages to Measure the Effects of the Federal Minimum Wage
David Card
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Oct., 1992), pp. 22-37.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199210%2946%3A1%3C22%3AURVIWT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-3

Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment? A Case Study of California, 1987-89
David Card
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Oct., 1992), pp. 38-54.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199210%2946%3A1%3C38%3ADMWREA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-%23

The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast-Food Industry
Lawrence F. Katz; Alan B. Krueger
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Oct., 1992), pp. 6-21.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199210%2946%3A1%3C6%3ATEOTMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S

NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.

http://www.jstor.org

LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 4 of 4 -

Employment Effects of Minimum Wages
Richard A. Lester
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 13, No. 2. (Jan., 1960), pp. 254-264.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28196001%2913%3A2%3C254%3AEEOMW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-3

The Effects of Minimum Wages on Wage Dispersion and Employment: Evidence from the
U.K. Wages Councils
Stephen Machin; Alan Manning
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 47, No. 2. (Jan., 1994), pp. 319-329.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0019-7939%28199401%2947%3A2%3C319%3ATEOMWO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-7

Seniority and Monopsony in the Academic Labor Market
Michael R. Ransom
The American Economic Review, Vol. 83, No. 1. (Mar., 1993), pp. 221-233.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28199303%2983%3A1%3C221%3ASAMITA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-J

The Economics of Minimum Wage Legislation
George J. Stigler
The American Economic Review, Vol. 36, No. 3. (Jun., 1946), pp. 358-365.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28194606%2936%3A3%3C358%3ATEOMWL%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A

Monopsony Power in the Market for Nurses
Daniel Sullivan
Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 32, No. 2, Part 2, Empirical Approaches to Market Power: A
Conference Sponsored by the University of Illinois and the Federal Trade Commission. (Oct., 1989),
pp. S135-S178.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2186%28198910%2932%3A2%3CS135%3AMPITMF%3E2.0.CO%3B2-1

Effects of the Minimum Wage on the Employment Status of Youths: An Update
Alison J. Wellington
The Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 26, No. 1. (Winter, 1991), pp. 27-46.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-166X%28199124%2926%3A1%3C27%3AEOTMWO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-5

NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.

