Manuscript submitted to The Econometrics Journal , pp. 1–32.

Two-Way Fixed Effects and Differences-in-Differences
with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects: A Survey
Clément de Chaisemartin† and Xavier D’Haultfœuille‡
†

Economics Department, Sciences Po 28 rue des Saint-Pères 75005 Paris, France.

E-mail: clement.dechaisemartin@sciencespo.fr
‡

CREST-ENSAE 5 avenue Henry le Chatelier 91120 Palaiseau, France.

E-mail: xavier.dhaultfoeuille@ensae.fr
Summary
Linear regressions with period and group fixed effects are widely used to estimate
policies’ effects: 26 of the 100 most cited papers published by the American Economic
Review from 2015 to 2019 estimate such regressions. It has recently been shown that
those regressions may produce misleading estimates, if the policy’s effect is heterogeneous between groups or over time, as is often the case. This survey reviews a fastgrowing literature that documents this issue, and that proposes alternative estimators
robust to heterogeneous effects. We use those alternative estimators to revisit Wolfers
(2006a).
Keywords: two-way fixed effects regressions, differences-in-differences, parallel trends,
heterogeneous treatment effects, panel data, repeated-cross section data, policy evaluation.

1. INTRODUCTION
A popular method to estimate the effect of a policy, or treatment, on an outcome is to
compare over time groups experiencing different evolutions of their exposure to treatment. In practice, this idea is implemented by regressing Yg,t , the outcome in group g and
at period t, on group fixed effects, period fixed effects, and Dg,t , the treatment of group
g at period t. For instance, to measure the effect of the minimum wage on employment
in the US, researchers have often regressed employment in county g and year t on county
fixed effects, year fixed effects, and the minimum wage in county g and year t.
Such two-way fixed effects (TWFE) regressions are probably the most-commonly used
technique in economics to measure the effect of a treatment on an outcome. de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) conducted a survey of the 20 papers with the most
Google Scholar citations published by the American Economic Review in 2015, and of
the similarly selected papers in 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019. Of those 100 papers, 26
have estimated at least one TWFE regression to estimate the effect of a treatment on an
outcome. TWFE regressions are also very commonly used in political science, sociology,
and environmental sciences.
Researchers have long thought that TWFE estimators are equivalent to differencesin-differences (DID) estimators. With two groups and two periods, a DID estimator
compares the outcome evolution from period 1 to 2 between a treatment group s that
switches from untreated to treated, and a control group n that is untreated at both dates:
DID = Ys,2 − Ys,1 − (Yn,2 − Yn,1 ) .

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

(1.1)

2

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

DID relies on a parallel trends assumption: in the absence of the treatment, both groups
would have experienced the same outcome evolution. Specifically, for every g ∈ {s, n}
and t ∈ {1, 2}, let Yg,t (0) and Yg,t (1) denote the potential outcomes in group g at period t
without and with the treatment, respectively.1 Parallel trends requires that the expected
evolution of the untreated outcome be the same in both groups:
E [Ys,2 (0) − Ys,1 (0)] = E [Yn,2 (0) − Yn,1 (0)] .
Under that assumption, DID is unbiased for the average treatment effect (ATE) in group
s at period 2 (see, e.g., Abadie (2005)):
E [DID] =E [Ys,2 − Ys,1 − (Yn,2 − Yn,1 )]
=E [Ys,2 (1) − Ys,1 (0) − (Yn,2 (0) − Yn,1 (0))]
=E [Ys,2 (1) − Ys,2 (0)] + E [Ys,2 (0) − Ys,1 (0)] − E [Yn,2 (0) − Yn,1 (0)]
=E [Ys,2 (1) − Ys,2 (0)] ,

(1.2)

where the last equality follows from the parallel trends assumption. Parallel trends is
partly testable, by comparing the outcome trends of groups s and n, before group s
received the treatment. In practice, such pre-trends tests sometimes fail, but other times
they indicate that the two groups were indeed on parallel paths before s got treated.2
Motivated by the fact that in the two-groups and two-periods design described above,
DID is equal to the treatment coefficient in a TWFE regression, researchers have also
estimated TWFE regressions in more complicated designs with many groups and periods, variation in treatment timing, treatments switching on and off, and/or non-binary
treatments. Recent research has shown that in those more complicated designs, TWFE
estimators are unbiased for an ATE if parallel trends holds, and if another assumption is
satisfied: the treatment effect should be constant, between groups and over time. Unlike
parallel trends, this assumption is unlikely to hold, even approximately, in most of the
applications where TWFE regressions have been used. For instance, the effect of the minimum wage on employment is likely to differ in counties with highly educated workers,
and in counties with less educated workers.
The realization that one of the most commonly used empirical methods in social science
relies on an often-implausible assumption has spurred a flurry of methodological papers
diagnosing the seriousness of the issue, and proposing alternative estimators. This review
aims to provide an overview of this recent literature, which has developed in such a quick
and dynamic manner that some practitioners may have gotten lost in the whirlwind of
new working papers. We start by giving an overview of the papers that have identified
TWFE’s regressions lack of robustness to heterogeneous treatment effects, and that have
proposed diagnostic tools practitioners may use to assess the seriousness of this issue.
We then give an overview of the papers that have proposed alternative estimators robust
1 Implicitly, this notation rules out dynamic treatment effects, and assumes that groups’ potential
outcomes only depend on their current treatment, not on their past treatments. This restriction is not
of essence to derive Equation (1.2) below, but it is of essence for some of the other results we cover, as
noted later in the paper. We relax it in Section 3.2.
2 Pre-trends tests come with caveats unveiled by a recent literature, see Kahn-Lang and Lang (2020),
Bilinski and Hatfield (2018), and Roth (2021). Similarly, recent papers have proposed relaxations of the
parallel trends assumption (see, e.g., Manski and Pepper, 2018; Rambachan and Roth, 2019; Freyaldenhoven et al., 2019). Though we allude to it in Section 3.2, this literature is mostly beyond the scope of
this survey. See Roth et al. (2022) for a review.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

3

to heterogeneous treatment effects. Finally, we revisit Wolfers (2006a), a famous TWFE
application, in light of the recent literature discussed in this survey. As a word of caution,
note that this literature is very recent, so several of the papers we review are still working
papers, which have not been through the peer-review process yet.
Table 2 in the conclusion summarizes the heterogeneity-robust estimators available to
applied researchers, depending on their research design. When available, the Stata and
R commands implementing the diagnostics tools and alternative estimators discussed in
this review are referenced, and the basic syntax of the Stata command is provided. We
refer the reader to the commands’ help files for further details on their syntax. Finally,
the Stata code for our re-analysis of Wolfers (2006a), where several of the estimators
discussed in this survey are computed, is available on the journal’s website.
2. TWFE REGRESSIONS WITH HETEROGENEOUS TREATMENT EFFECTS
2.1. TWFE regressions may not identify a convex combination of treatment effects
We consider a panel of G groups observed at T periods, respectively indexed by the
placeholders g and t, which can refer to any group or time period. Typically, groups are
geographical entities gathering many observations, but a group could also just be a single
individual or firm. Let βbf e denote the coefficient of Dg,t , the treatment in group g at
period t, in an OLS regression of Yg,t , the outcome of group g at period t, on group fixed
effects, period fixed effects, and Dg,t :
Yg,t = α
bg + γ
bt + βbf e Dg,t + g,t ,

(2.1)

where g,t denotes the regression residual. We assume that the regression is unweighted,
but it is sometimes weighted by Ng,t , the population of group g at period t. The results discussed below also apply to this weighted regression, see de Chaisemartin and
D’Haultfœuille (2020).3
de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020) show that under a parallel trends assumption on the potential outcome without treatment Yg,t (0),


h i
X
E βbf e = E 
Wg,t T Eg,t  .
(2.2)
(g,t):Dg,t 6=0

If the treatment is binary, T Eg,t = Yg,t (1) − Yg,t (0), the ATE in group g at time t. If
the treatment is discrete or continuous, T Eg,t = (Yg,t (Dg,t ) − Yg,t (0))/Dg,t , the effect of
moving the treatment from 0 to Dg,t scaled by Dg,t .4 The Wg,t are weights summing to
1, that are proportional to and of the same sign as
Dg,t − Dg,. − D.,t + D.,. ,

(2.3)

3 The regression could also be estimated using more disaggregated outcome data. For instance, groups
may be US counties, and one may estimate the regression using individual-level outcome measures,
assigning group membership based on county of residence. This disaggregated regression is equivalent to
the aggregated regression in (2.1), provided Yg,t is defined as the average outcome of individuals in cell
(g, t), and the aggregated regression is weighted by the number of individuals in cell (g, t). Accordingly,
the results below also apply to disaggregated regressions, see de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020).
4 de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020) derive Equation (2.2) assuming that groups’ potential
outcomes only depend on their current treatment, not on their past treatments. With dynamic effects,
Equation (2.2) still holds if the treatment is binary and staggered, except that some of the T Eg,t s become
effects of having been treated for more than one period.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

4

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

where Dg,. is the average treatment of group g across periods, D.,t is the average treatment at period t across groups, and D.,. is the average treatment across groups and
periods.
Equations (2.2) and (2.3) have two important consequences. First, Wg,t is in general
not equal to one divided by the number of treated (g, t) cells, so βbf e may be biased
for the average treatment effect across those cells, the ATT. A special case where Wg,t
is equal to one divided by the number of treated (g, t) cells, and where βbf e is therefore
unbiased for the ATT is when (i) the design is staggered, meaning that groups’ treatment
can only increase over time and can change at most once;5 (ii) the treatment is binary;
and (iii) there is no variation in treatment timing: all treated groups start receiving the
treatment at the same date. However, conditions (i)-(iii) are seldom met in practice. βbf e
can also be unbiased for the ATT if one is ready to make more assumptions than just
parallel trends. For instance, if one is also ready to assume that Dg,t − Dg,. − D.,t + D.,.
is uncorrelated with T Eg,t , the treatment effects that are up- and down-weighted by βbf e
do not systematically differ, and one can then show that βbf e is unbiased for the ATT
(see Corollary 2 in de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille, 2020).6 Unfortunately, this nocorrelation condition is often implausible. To see this, note that Dg,t − Dg,. − D.,t + D.,.
is decreasing in Dg,. , meaning that βbf e downweights the treatment effect of groups with
the highest average treatment from period 1 to T . However, groups with the largest and
lowest average treatment may have systematically different treatment effects. Similarly,
Dg,t −Dg,. −D.,t +D.,. is decreasing in D.,t , and the treatment effects at time periods with
the highest average treatment may also systematically differ from the treatment effects
at time periods where the average treatment is lower. In staggered adoption designs,
D.,t is increasing in t so the weights are decreasing in t. If the treatment effect is also
monotonically increasing or decreasing in t, this no-correlation condition will fail. This
no-correlation condition is partly testable, if one observes a proxy variable Pg,t that is
likely to be correlated with T Eg,t . Then, one can just test if Dg,t − Dg,. − D.,t + D.,. is
correlated with Pg,t .
Second, and perhaps more worryingly, Equation (2.3) implies that some of the weights
Wg,t may be negative. This means that in the minimum wage example, βbf e could be
estimating something like 3 times the effect of the minimum wage on employment in
Santa Clara county, minus 2 times the effect in Wayne county. Then, if raising the
minimum wage by one dollar decreases employment
by 5% in Santa Clara county and
h i
h byi
20% in Wayne county, one would have E βbf e = 3 × −0.05 − (2 × −0.2) = 0.25. E βbf e
would be positive, while the minimum wage’s effect on employment is negative both in
b
Santa Clara and in Wayne county.
h i This example shows that βf e may not satisfy the
“no-sign reversal property”: E βbf e could for instance be positive, even if the treatment
effect is strictly negative in every (g, t). This phenomenon can only arise when some of
5 Together, (i) and (ii) imply that groups can only switch from untreated to treated, and may do so at
different points in time. This is probably the definition of a staggered design many people have in mind.
(i) extends the definition of a staggered design to non-binary treatments.
6 A special case of this “no-correlation” condition is if the treatment effect is constant, i.e. T Eg,t = δ
h
i
for all (g, t). Then, it directly follows from Equation (2.2) that E βbf e = δ. However, constant effect is
most often an implausible assumption.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

5

the weights Wg,t are negative: when all those weights are positive, βbf e does satisfy the
no-sign reversal property. Note that despite its intuitive appeal and its popularity among
applied researchers, the no-sign reversal property is not grounded in statistical decision
theory, unlike other commonly-used criteria to discriminate estimators such as the meansquared error. Still, it is connected to the economic concept of Pareto efficiency. If an
estimator satisfies “no-sign-reversal”, the estimand attached to it can only be positive if
the treatment is not Pareto-dominated by the absence of treatment, meaning that not
everybody is hurt by the treatment. Conversely, the estimand can only be negative if
the treatment does not Pareto-dominate the absence of treatment. On the other hand,
if an estimator does not satisfy “no-sign-reversal”, the estimand attached to it could for
instance be positive, even if the treatment is Pareto-dominated.
Inasmuch as “no-sign-reversal” is a desirable property, it becomes interesting to understand when βbf e may satisfy it. Equation (2.3) shows that with a binary treatment,
the weights attached to βbf e could all be positive. With a binary treatment, all the (g, t)s
entering the summation in (2.2) must have Dg,t = 1, so for a weight Wg,t to be strictly
negative, one must have 1 + D.,. < Dg,. + D.,t . This cannot happen if Dg,. + D.,t ≤ 1 for
every (g, t). Accordingly, all the weights are likely to be positive when there is no group
that is treated most of the time, and no time periods where most groups are treated. In
staggered designs, this has led Jakiela (2021) to propose to drop the last periods of the
data, those when D.,t is the highest, to mitigate or eliminate the negative weights. One
could also drop the always-treated groups, if there are any.
On the other hand, Equation (2.3) shows that with a non-binary treatment, it becomes
more likely that some of the weights Wg,t are negative. Gentzkow et al. (2011) study the
effect of the number of newspapers in county g and year t on turnout in presidential
elections. Assume that in year t, county g has 1 newspaper (Dg,t = 1), which is below its
average number of newspapers across years, equal, say, to 2 (Dg,. = 2). At the same time,
the average number of newspapers across counties in year t is equal to 2 (D.,t = 2), which
is above the average number of newspapers across all counties and years, equal, say, to 1
(D.,. = 1). Then, it follows from (2.3) that the weight assigned to the effect of newspapers
in county g and year t is strictly negative. More generally, a necessary condition to have
that all weights are positive is that in every period where the population’s treatment is
higher than its average across periods (D.,t ≥ D.,. ), the treatment of each treated group
must also be larger than its average across periods (Dg,t ≥ Dg,. for all gs such that
Dg,t 6= 0). This condition is likely to often fail.
The twowayfeweights Stata (see de Chaisemartin et al., 2019) and R (see Zhang and
de Chaisemartin, 2021) commands compute the weights Wg,t in (2.2). The basic syntax
of the Stata command is:
twowayfeweights outcome groupid timeid treatment, type(feTR)
A decomposition similar to (2.2) can be obtained for TWFE regressions with control
variables, and for βbf d , the treatment’s coefficient in a regression of the outcome’s first
difference on the treatment’s first difference and period fixed effects. de Chaisemartin and
D’Haultfœuille (2020) also derive decompositions similar to (2.2), for βbf e and βbf d , under
common trends and under the assumption that the treatment effect does not change over
time. The weights in all those decompositions are also computed by the twowayfeweights
Stata and R commands.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

6

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020) use the twowayfeweights Stata command
to revisit Gentzkow et al. (2011). The authors regress the change in turnout in county
g between two elections on the change of the county’s number of newspapers and stateyear fixed effects. They find that βbf d = 0.0026 (s.e. = 0.0009): one more newspaper
increases turnout by 0.26 percentage points. Using the twowayfeweights Stata package,
de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020) find that under parallel trends, βbf d estimates a weighted sum of the effects of newspapers on turnout in 10,077 county×election
cells, where 5,472 effects are weighted positively while 4,605 are weighted negatively, and
where negative weights sum to -1.43. Accordingly, βbf d is far from estimating a convex
combination of effects. The weights are negatively correlated with the election year: βbf d
is more likely to upweight newspapers’ effects in early elections, and to downweight or
weight negatively newspapers’ effects in late elections. This may lead βbf d to be biased if
newspapers’ effects change over time. Similar results apply to βbf e : more than half of the
weights attached to that coefficient are negative, and negative weights sum to -0.53.
The decomposition in (2.2) is the main result in de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille
(2020). Related results have appeared earlier in Theorems S1 and S2 of the Supplementary Material of de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2015). Borusyak and Jaravel
(2017) consider the case with a binary and staggered treatment. In their Lemma 1 and
Proposition 1, they assume that the treatment effect varies with the duration elapsed
since one has started receiving the treatment but does not vary across groups and over
time. Then, they show that βbf e estimates a weighted sum of effects, that may assign
negative weights to long-run treatment effects. Their Appendix C also contains another
result related to that in Equation (2.2).7
2.2. The origin of the problem: “forbidden comparisons”
2.2.1. Forbidden comparisons when the treatment is binary and the design is staggered
Goodman-Bacon (2021) shows that when the treatment is binary and the design is staggered, meaning that groups can switch in but not out of treatment, we have
X
βbf e =
vg,g0 ,t,t0 DIDg,g0 ,t,t0 ,
(2.4)
g6=g 0 ,t<t0

where DIDg,g0 ,t,t0 is a DID comparing the outcome evolution of two groups g and g 0 from
a pre period t to a post period t0 , and where vg,g0 ,t,t0 are non-negative weights summing
to one, with vg,g0 ,t,t0 > 0 if and only if g switches treatment between t and t0 while g 0 does
not.8 Some of the DIDg,g0 ,t,t0 s in Equation (2.4) compare a group switching treatment
from t to t0 to a group untreated at both dates, while other DIDg,g0 ,t,t0 s compare a
switching group to a group treated at both dates. The negative weights in (2.2) originate
from this second type of DIDs.
To see that, let us consider a simple example, first introduced by Borusyak and Jaravel
7 Prior to that, Chernozhukov et al. (2013) had shown that one-way FE regressions may be biased for the
average treatment effect, though unlike TWFE regressions they always estimate a convex combination
of effects.
8 Goodman-Bacon (2021) actually decomposes βb as a weighted average of DIDs between cohorts of
fe
groups becoming treated at the same date, and between periods of time where their treatment remains
constant. One can then further decompose his decomposition, as we do here.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

7

(2017),9 with two groups and three periods. Group e, the early-treated group, is untreated
at period 1 and treated at periods 2 and 3. Group `, the late-treated group, is untreated
at periods 1 and 2 and treated at period 3. In this example, Equation (2.4) reduces to
βbf e = (DIDe,`,1,2 + DID`,e,2,3 )/2,

(2.5)

with
DIDe,`,1,2 = Ye,2 − Ye,1 − (Y`,2 − Y`,1 ) ,
DID`,e,2,3 = Y`,3 − Y`,2 − (Ye,3 − Ye,2 ) .
DIDe,`,1,2 compares the period-1-to-2 outcome evolution of group e, that switches from
untreated to treated from period 1 to 2, to the outcome evolution of group ` that is
untreated at both periods. DIDe,`,1,2 is similar to the DID estimator in Equation (1.1),
and under parallel trends it is unbiased for the treatment effect in group e at period 2:
E [DIDe,`,1,2 ] = E [T Ee,2 ] .

(2.6)

DID`,e,2,3 , on the other hand, compares the period-2-to-3 outcome evolution of group `,
that switches from untreated to treated from period 2 to 3, to the outcome evolution of
group e that is treated at both dates. At both periods, e’s outcome is its treated potential
outcome, which is equal to the sum of its untreated outcome and its treatment effect.
Accordingly,
Ye,3 − Ye,2 = Ye,3 (0) + T Ee,3 − (Ye,2 (0) + T Ee,2 ).
On the other hand, group ` is only treated at period 3, so
Y`,3 − Y`,2 = Y`,3 (0) + T E`,3 − Y`,2 (0).
Taking the expectation of the difference between the two previous equations,
E [DID`,e,2,3 ] = E [T E`,3 − T Ee,3 + T Ee,2 ] ,

(2.7)

where E [Ye,3 (0) − Ye,2 (0)] and E [Y`,3 (0) − Y`,2 (0)] cancel out under the parallel trends
assumption. Finally, it follows from Equations (2.5), (2.6), and (2.7) that
h i
E βbf e = E [1/2T E`,3 + T Ee,2 − 1/2T Ee,3 ] .
(2.8)
In this simple example, Equation (2.2) reduces to (2.8). The right-hand side of Equation
(2.8) is a weighted sum of three ATEs where one ATE receives a negative weight. As
the previous derivation shows, this negative weight comes from the fact βbf e leverages
DID`,e,2,3 , a DID comparing a group switching from untreated to treated to a group
treated at both periods.
To make things more concrete, Figure 1 below shows the actual and counterfactual
outcome evolution, in a numerical example with three periods and an early and a late
treated group. All treatment effects are positive: the actual outcomes, on the solid lines,
are always above the counterfactual outcomes on the dashed lines. However, βbf e is negative. βbf e is the simple average of the DID comparing the early- to the late-treated group
from period one to two, which is positive, and of the DID comparing the late- to the
early-treated group from period two to three, which is negative, and larger in absolute
9 Borusyak and Jaravel (2017) have also coined the “forbidden comparisons” expression we borrow here.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

8

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

value than the first DID. The reason why the second DID is negative is that the treatment effect of the early-treated group increases substantially from period two to three,
so this group’s outcome increases more than that of the late-treated group.
Figure 1. A numerical example with three periods, an early and a late treated group

Late
becomes
treated

Early
becomes
treated

1

2
Y early

Y(0) early

3
Y late

t

Y(0) late

If one is ready to assume that the treatment effect does not change over time, T Ee,3 =
T Ee,2 , and (2.7) simplifies to
E [DID`,e,2,3 ] = E [T E`,3 ] .

(2.9)

Then, the negative weight in (2.7) disappears, and βbf e estimates a weighted average
of treatment effects. This extends beyond this simple example: Theorem S2 of the Web
Appendix of de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020) and Equation (16) of GoodmanBacon (2021) show that in staggered adoption designs with a binary treatment, βbf e
estimates a convex combination of effects, if the treatment effect does not change over
time but may still vary across groups. This conclusion, however, no longer holds if the
treatment is not binary or the design is not staggered. Moreover, assuming constant
treatment effects over time is often implausible as this rules out both dynamic treatment
effects and calendar time effects.
The decomposition in Equation (2.4) is key to understand why βbf e may not identify a
convex combination of treatment effects. On the other hand, it cannot be used to assess if
βbf e does indeed estimate a convex combination of effects in a given application. Consider
an example similar to that above, but with a third group n that remains untreated from
period 1 to 3. In this second example, the decomposition in (2.4) now indicates that βbf e
assigns a weight equal to 1/6 to DIDs comparing a switcher to a group treated at both
periods. On the other hand, all the weights in (2.2) are positive in this second example.
This phenomenon can also arise in real data sets. In the data of Stevenson and Wolfers
(2006) used by Goodman-Bacon (2021) in his empirical application, if one restricts the

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

9

sample to states that are not always treated and to the first ten years of the panel, all the
weights in (2.2) are positive, but the sum of the weights in (2.4) on DIDs comparing a
switcher to a group treated at both periods is equal to 0.06. Beyond these examples, one
can show that having DIDs comparing a switcher to a group treated at both periods in
(2.4) is necessary but not sufficient to have negative weights in (2.2). Similarly, the sum
of the weights on DIDs comparing a switcher to a group treated at both periods in (2.4)
is always larger than the absolute value of the sum of the negative weights in (2.2). The
reason why Equation (2.4) “overestimates” the negative weights in (2.2) is that as soon
as there are three distinct treatment dates, there is not a unique way of decomposing
βbf e as a weighted average of DIDs, and there exists other decompositions than Equation
(2.4) putting less weight on DIDs using a group treated at both periods as the control
group.10
The bacondecomp Stata (see Goodman-Bacon et al., 2019) and R (see Flack and Edward, 2020) commands compute the DIDg,g0 ,t,t0 s entering in (2.4), the weights assigned
to them, as well as the sum of the weights on DIDg,g0 ,t,t0 s using a group treated at both
periods as the control group. The basic syntax of the bacondecomp Stata command is:
bacondecomp outcome treatment, ddetail
2.2.2. “Forbidden comparisons” when the design is not staggered or treatment is not
binary When the treatment is not staggered or when it is not binary, βbf e may leverage
another type of comparison: it may compare the outcome evolution of a group m whose
treatment increases more to the outcome evolution of a group ` whose treatment increases
less. In fact, with two groups m and ` and two periods, one can show that
Ym,2 − Ym,1 − (Y`,2 − Y`,1 )
,
βbf e =
Dm,2 − Dm,1 − (D`,2 − D`,1 )

(2.12)

where the right hand side of the previous display is the Wald-DID estimator studied
by de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2018). The Wald-DID compares the outcome
evolution of groups m and `, and scales that comparison by the differential evolution
of m’s and `’s treatments. de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2018) show that the
Wald-DID may not estimate a convex combination of effects, unless the treatment effect
is constant over time and is the same in groups m and `. This second requirement was
not present in the binary and staggered case. In that case, we have seen before that if
the treatment effect is constant over time, βbf e estimates a convex combination of effects,
even if the treatment effect varies between groups.
10 To see that, let t0 < t1 < t2 be three dates, let e be an early-treated group becoming treated at
t1 , let ` be a late-treated group becoming treated at t2 , and let n be a group untreated yet at t2 . Let
v = min(v`,e,t1 ,t2 , ve,n,t0 ,t2 ) > 0. One has
DID`,e,t1 ,t2 = DID`,n,t0 ,t2 − DIDe,n,t0 ,t2 + DIDe,`,t0 ,t1 .

(2.10)

Then, it follows from Equation (2.10) that
v`,e,t1 ,t2 DID`,e,t1 ,t2 + ve,n,t0 ,t2 DIDe,n,t0 ,t2
=(v`,e,t1 ,t2 − v)DID`,e,t1 ,t2 + vDID`,n,t0 ,t2 + vDIDe,`,t0 ,t1 + (ve,n,t0 ,t2 − v)DIDe,n,t0 ,t2 .

(2.11)

Plugging Equation (2.11) into Equation (2.4) will yield a different decomposition of βbf e as a weighted
average of DIDs. But the weight on DIDs using a group treated at both periods as the control group is
equal to v`,e,t1 ,t2 in the left-hand-side of Equation (2.11), and to (v`,e,t1 ,t2 − v) in its right-hand side.
Accordingly, this new decomposition puts strictly less weight than Equation (2.4) on DIDs using a group
treated at both periods as the control group.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

10

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

To see that with a non-binary or non-staggered treatment βbf e may not estimate a
convex combination of effects even if the treatment effect is constant over time, let us
consider a simple example. Assume that group m goes from 0 to 2 units of treatment
from period 1 to 2, while group ` goes from 0 to 1 unit. Then, the denominator of the
Wald-DID is equal to 2 − 0 − (1 − 0) = 1, so

βbf e = Ym,2 − Ym,1 − (Y`,2 − Y`,1 ) .

To simplify, let us also assume that in both groups, potential outcomes are linear in the
number of treatment units, with slopes that are constant over time but may differ for
groups m and `:

Ym,t (d) =Ym,t (0) + δm d
Y`,t (d) =Ym,t (0) + δ` d.

Then, under parallel trends,
h i
E βbf e =E [Ym,2 (2) − Ym,1 (0) − (Y`,2 (1) − Y`,1 (0))]
=E [Ym,2 (0) + 2δm − Ym,1 (0) − (Y`,2 (0) + δ` − Y`,1 (0))]
=E [Ym,2 (0) − Ym,1 (0)] − E [Y`,2 (0) − Y`,1 (0)] + 2δm − δ`
=2δm − δ` ,

a weighted sum of m and `’s treatment effects, where group `’s effect is weighted negatively. Intuitively, group ` is also treated at period two, and βbf e , which uses ` as a control
group, subtracts its treatment effect out. This example also shows that βbf e may fail to
identify a convex combination of effects, even without variation in treatment timing:
here, both m and ` start getting treated at period 2.

To make things more concrete, Figure 2 below shows the actual and counterfactual
outcome evolution, in a numerical example with two periods, a group whose treatment
increases more, from 0 to 2 units, and a group whose treatment increases less, from 0 to 1
unit. All treatment effects are positive: the actual outcomes, on the solid lines, are always
above the counterfactual outcomes on the dashed lines. However, βbf e , which is equal to
the DID comparing the more- and the less-treated groups from period one to two, is
negative. The reason why this DID is negative is that the treatment effect, per treatment
unit, of the less-treated group is more than twice larger than the treatment effect of the
more-treated group. Accordingly, the outcome of the less-treated group increases more,
despite the fact that this group receives a twice smaller treatment dose in period 2.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

11

Figure 2. A numerical example with two periods, a more- and a less-treated group

t
1

2
Y more

Y(0) more

Y less

Y(0) less

2.3. Decomposition results for other TWFE regression coefficients
2.3.1. Dynamic TWFE regressions In staggered designs with a binary treatment, Sun
and Abraham (2021) consider event-study regressions:
bt +
Yg,t = γ
bg + λ

L
X

βb` 1{Fg = t − `} + εg,t ,

(2.13)

`=−K,`6=−1

where Fg is the first period at which group g is treated. In words, the outcome is regressed
on group and period fixed effects, and relative-time indicators 1{Fg = t − `} equal to 1
if group g started receiving the treatment ` periods ago. For ` ≥ 0, βb` is supposed to
estimate the cumulative effect of ` + 1 treatment periods. For ` ≤ −2, βb` is supposed
to be a placebo coefficient testing the parallel trends assumption, by comparing the
outcome trends of groups that will and will not start receiving the treatment in |`|
periods. Researchers have sometimes estimated a variant of this regression, where the
first and last indicators 1{Fg = t + K} and 1{Fg = t − L} are respectively replaced
by an indicator for being at least K periods away from adoption (1{Fg ≥ t + K}) and
an indicator for having adopted at least L periods ago (1{Fg ≤ t − L}). Such endpoint
binning is for instance recommended by Schmidheiny and Siegloch (2020): without it, the
regression implicitly assumes that the treatment no longer has any effect after L periods.
Instead, with endpoint binning the regression assumes that that the treatment effect is
constant after L periods, a more plausible assumption.
Sun and Abraham (2021) show that under parallel trends, for ` ≥ 0,


h i
X
XX
E βb` = E 
wg,` T Eg (`) +
wg,`0 T Eg (`0 ) ,
g

`0 6=` g

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

(2.14)

12

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

where T Eg (`) is the cumulative P
effect of ` + 1 treatment
periods in group g, and wg,`
P
and wg,`0 are weights such that g wg,` = 1 and g wg,`0 = 0 for every `0 .11 The first
summation in the right-hand side of Equation (2.14) is a weighted sum across groups of
the cumulative effect of ` + 1 treatment periods, with weights summing to 1 but that may
be negative. This first summation resembles that in the decomposition of the “static”
TWFE coefficient in (2.2), and it implies that βb` may be biased if the cumulative effect
of ` + 1 treatment periods varies across groups. The second summation is a weighted
sum, across `0 6= ` and groups, of the cumulative effect of `0 + 1 treatment periods in
group g, with weights summing to 0. This second summation was not present in the
decomposition of the static TWFE coefficient. Importantly, its presence implies that βb` ,
which is supposed to estimate the cumulative effect of ` + 1 treatment
periods, may in
P
fact be contaminated by the effects of `0 + 1 treatment periods. As g wg,`0 = 0 for every
`0 , this second summation disappears if T Eg (`0 ) does not vary across groups, but it is
often implausible that the treatment effect does not vary across groups.
For ` ≤ −2, and without assuming parallel trends, Sun and Abraham (2021) show
that βb` estimates the sum of two terms. As intended, the first term measures deviations
from parallel trends between groups that will and will not start receiving the treatment
in |`| periods. But the second term is similar to the second summation in the right-hand
side of Equation (2.14): a weighted sum, across `0 ≥ 0 and groups, of the cumulative
effect of `0 + 1 treatment periods in group g, with weights summing to zero. Due to
the presence of this second term, the expectation of βb` may differ from zero even if
parallel trends holds, and it may be equal to zero even if parallel trends fails. Thus, an
important consequence of the results in Sun and Abraham (2021) is that in the presence
of heterogeneous treatment effects, (2.13) cannot be used to test for parallel trends.
The eventstudyweights Stata command (see Sun, 2020) computes the weights attached to event-study regressions. Its basic syntax is:
eventstudyweights {rel time list}, absorb(i.groupid i.timeid)
cohort(first treatment) rel time(ry),
where rel time list is the list of relative-time indicators 1{Fg = t − `} included in
(2.13), first treatment is a variable equal to the period when group g got treated for
the first time, and ry is a variable equal to timeid minus first treatment, the number
of periods elapsed since group g started receiving the treatment.
Event-study regressions can only be used in staggered designs with a binary treatment.
In more complicated designs where the treatment is not binary or a group’s treatment can
increase or decrease multiple times, some researchers have estimated TWFE regressions of
the outcome on the treatment and its first K lags, the so-called distributed-lag regression.
Other researchers have estimated a panel-data version of the local-projection method
proposed by Jordà (2005) for time-series data: Yg,t+` is regressed on group and period FEs
and Dg,t , for ` ∈ {0, ..., K}. de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) show that those
regressions suffer from similar issues as the event-study regression: under parallel trends,
the distributed-lag and local-projection regressions may produce biased estimates of the
11 Equation (2.14) follows from Proposition 3 in Sun and Abraham (2021), assuming no binning and
that the treatment does not have an effect after L + 1 periods of exposure. A slight difference is that the
decomposition in Sun and Abraham (2021) gathers groups that started receiving the treatment at the
same period into cohorts. Their decomposition can then be further decomposed, as we do here.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

13

treatment’s instantaneous and dynamic effects, if effects are heterogeneous across groups
and over time. In particular, they do not satisfy the no-sign reversal property: one could
have that the treatment’s instantaneous and dynamic effects are positive in every (g, t)
cell, but the expectations of those regression coefficients are negative. de Chaisemartin
and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) also show that the panel-data version of the local-projection
method may yield biased estimates even if effects are homogeneous.

2.3.2. TWFE regressions with more than one treatment Another case of interest is
TWFE regressions with several treatments. For instance, to estimate separately the effect
of medical and recreational marijuana laws on consumption, one may regress marijuana
consumption in state g and year t on state and year fixed effects, on whether state g
has a recreational marijuana law in year t, and on whether state g has a medical law
in year t. de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021b) show that in those regressions,
the coefficient on a given treatment identifies a weighted sum of that treatment’s effect
across (g, t)s, with weights summing to 1 but that may be negative, plus weighted sums
of the effects of the other treatments in the regression, with weights summing to 0. In the
example above, the coefficient on recreational laws may be contaminated by the effect
of medical laws. The weights attached to TWFE regressions with several treatments are
also computed by the twowayfeweights Stata and R commands.
3. ALTERNATIVE HETEROGENEITY-ROBUST DID ESTIMATORS
In this section, we review several recently-proposed alternatives to TWFE regressions.
We restrict our attention to estimators relying on parallel trends assumptions, like TWFE
regressions, but that do not restrict treatment effect heterogeneity between groups and
over time, unlike TWFE regressions. This excludes papers that have assumed randomized treatment timing (see, e.g., Athey and Imbens, 2022; Roth and Sant’Anna, 2021)
or sequential treatment randomization (see, e.g., Bojinov et al., 2021), rather than parallel trends. Intuitively, all the estimators below carefully choose valid control groups, to
avoid making the “forbidden comparisons” that render TWFE estimators non-robust to
heterogeneous treatment effects. We start by reviewing estimators ruling out dynamic
effects, i.e. that assume that a group’s current outcome only depends on its current treatment, before reviewing estimators that allow dynamic effects. In complicated designs, say
with a continuous treatment that changes often, allowing for dynamic effects comes with
a number of costs: it may result in imprecise estimators, and may complicate the interpretation of the estimated effects. Then, one may want to carefully evaluate if past
treatments are indeed likely to affect the current outcome.
3.1. Estimators ruling out dynamic effects

With a binary treatment, de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020) propose to use the
DIDM estimator. With two time periods, DIDM is merely a weighted average of
DID+ =

1
N0,1

X

(Yg,2 − Yg,1 ) −

g:Dg,1 =0,Dg,2 =1

1
N0,0

X

(Yg,2 − Yg,1 ),

g:Dg,1 =0,Dg,2 =0

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

14

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

and of
DID− =

1
N1,1

X

(Yg,2 − Yg,1 ) −

g:Dg,1 =1,Dg,2 =1

1
N1,0

X

(Yg,2 − Yg,1 ),

g:Dg,1 =1,Dg,2 =0

where for all (d1 , d2 ) ∈ {0, 1}2 , Nd1 ,d2 denotes the number of groups such that Dg,1 = d1
and Dg,2 = d2 .12 DID+ is a DID comparing the period-one-to-two outcome evolution
of groups going from untreated to treated, the “switchers in”, and of groups untreated
at both dates. It is similar to the DID estimator in Equation (1.1), and it is unbiased
for the treatment effect of the switching-in groups at period 2, under a parallel trends
assumption on the untreated outcome Yg,t (0). DID− is a DID comparing the periodone-to-two outcome evolution of groups treated at both dates, and of groups going from
treated to untreated, the “switchers out”. DID− is also similar to the DID estimator in
Equation (1.1), switching “treatment” and “non-treatment”. Then, one can show that
DID− is unbiased for the treatment effect of the switching-out groups at period 2, under
a parallel trends assumption on the treated outcome Yg,t (1).
The DIDM estimator can easily be extended to applications with more than two time
periods. For each pair of consecutive time periods, one can compute a DID+,t estimator
comparing groups going from untreated to treated from t − 1 to t to groups untreated at
both dates, and a DID−,t estimator comparing groups treated at t − 1 and t to groups
going from treated to untreated from t − 1 to t. Then, one averages the DID+,t and
DID−,t estimators across t. de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020) show that the
resulting estimator is unbiased for the average treatment effect across all switching (g, t)
cells, namely cells such that Dg,t 6= Dg,t−1 . They also propose placebo estimators to test
the parallel trends assumptions underlying DIDM . The placebos compare the outcome
trends of switchers and non-switchers, before the switchers switch.
With more than two time periods, the DIDM estimator may be biased if the treatment
has dynamic effects. For instance, to infer the counterfactual trend that groups going
from untreated to treated from t − 1 to t would have experienced without that switch,
DID+,t uses as controls all groups untreated at t − 1 and t. However, some of those
groups may have been treated, say, at t − 2. If the treatment has dynamic effects, this
past treatment may affect their period t − 1-to-t outcome evolution, thus making them
potentially invalid controls. Note that if the treatment is binary and staggered, such
situations cannot arise: groups untreated at t − 1 and t have been untreated all along.
Accordingly, DIDM is robust to dynamic effects in binary and staggered designs.
The DIDM estimator can easily be extended to non-binary treatments taking a finite
number of values. Then, it is a weighted average, across d and t, of DIDs comparing the
t − 1 to t outcome evolution of groups whose treatment goes from d to some other value
from t − 1 to t, and of groups with a treatment equal to d at both dates, normalized
by the intensity of the treatment change experienced by the switchers. For instance, in
Gentzkow et al. (2011), a county going from 2 to 4 newspapers is compared to a county
with 2 newspapers at both dates. The multi-period DID estimator in Imai and Kim
(2021) is related to the DIDM estimator. It can be used with a binary treatment, to
estimate the switchers-in’s treatment effect.
12 Implicitly, this definition of DID+ and DID− assumes that all groups have the same sizes. The DID
M
estimator can easily be extended to instances where groups have heterogeneous sizes, see de Chaisemartin
and D’Haultfœuille (2020).

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

15

The DIDM estimator is computed by the did multiplegt Stata (see de Chaisemartin
et al., 2019) and R (see Zhang and de Chaisemartin, 2020) commands. The basic syntax
of the Stata command is:
did multiplegt outcome groupid timeid treatment
de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020) compute the DIDM estimator in the Gentzkow
et al. (2011) example mentioned above, that studies the effect of newspapers on turnout in
US presidential elections. de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020) find that DIDM =
0.0043 (s.e. = 0.0014), meaning that one more newspaper increases turnout by 0.43
percentage point. DIDM is 66% larger than, and significantly different from, βbf d , the
estimator reported by Gentzkow et al. (2011).
de Chaisemartin et al. (2022) extend the DIDM estimator to continuous treatments.
To simplify, we present their estimators in the case with two time periods, though they
readily extend to the case with more periods. de Chaisemartin et al. (2022) assume that
from period one to two, the treatment of some units, hereafter referred to as the movers,
changes. They also assume that the treatment of other units, hereafter referred to as
the stayers, does not change. This assumption is likely to be met when the treatment is
say, trade tariffs: tariffs’ reforms rarely apply to all products, so it is likely that tariffs
of at least some products stay constant over time. On the other hand, this assumption
is unlikely to be met when the treatment is say, precipitations: geographical units never
experience the exact same precipitations over two consecutive years.
Under the assumption that there are some stayers, the estimator proposed by de Chaisemartin et al. (2022) compares the outcome evolution of movers and stayers, with the
same period-one treatment. With a continuous treatment, such comparisons can either
be achieved by reweigthing stayers by propensity score weights, or by adjusting movers’
outcome change using a nonparametric regression of the outcome change on the periodone treatment among the stayers. Under parallel trends assumptions, the corresponding
estimands identify a weighted average of the effect, across all movers, of moving their
treatment from its period-one to its period-two value, scaled by the difference between
these two values. This effect is a weighted average of the slopes of movers’ potential
outcome function, between their period-one and period-two treatments.
The estimators in de Chaisemartin et al. (2022) can be extended to the case where there
are no stayers, provided there are quasi-stayers, meaning units whose treatment barely
changes from period one to two. Alternatively, one could also use the estimator proposed
by Graham and Powell (2012), which compares the outcome evolution of movers and quasi
stayers, but without conditioning on units’ period-one treatment. Their estimator relies
on a linear treatment effect assumption, unlike those in de Chaisemartin et al. (2022).
When there are no true stayers, both estimators require choosing a bandwidth, namely
the lowest treatment change below which a unit can be considered as a quasi-stayer.
Neither de Chaisemartin et al. (2022) or Graham and Powell (2012) derive an “optimal”
bandwidth, so for now bandwidth choice is left to the discretion of the researcher. If
the data has at least three periods, one could also use the correlated-random-coefficient
estimator proposed by Chamberlain (1992). While it allows for some treatment effect
heterogeneity, that estimator relies on a linear treatment effect assumption, like the
estimator in Graham and Powell (2012).
de Chaisemartin et al. (2022) show that after some relabelling, some of their estimators

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

16

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

are equivalent or nearly equivalent to estimators that had been previously proposed by
de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2018), Abadie (2005), and Callaway and Sant’Anna
(2021). This implies that their estimators can be computed, up to small tweaks, by the
companion software for those papers. We refer the reader to de Chaisemartin et al. (2022)
for a precise description of how their estimators can be computed using existing software.
3.2. Estimators allowing for dynamic effects when the treatment is binary and the
design is staggered.
For any t ∈ {1, ..., T }, let 0t (resp. 1t ) denote a vectors of t zeros (resp. ones). With
dynamic effects, group g’s outcome at time t is allowed to depend on her past treatments.
For any (d1 , ..., dt ), let Yg,t (d1 , ..., dt ) denote group g’s potential outcome at period t with
treatments (d1 , ..., dt ) from period 1 to t.13 In particular, Yg,t (0t ) is group g’s outcome
without ever being treated from period 1 to t. With dynamic effects, Callaway and
Sant’Anna (2021) and Sun and Abraham (2021) have proposed to replace the parallel
trends assumption on Yg,t (0) by a parallel trends assumption on Yg,t (0t ): for all g 6= g 0
and t ≥ 2,
E [Yg,t (0t ) − Yg,t−1 (0t−1 )] = E [Yg0 ,t (0t ) − Yg0 ,t−1 (0t−1 )] .

(3.1)

We now review the estimators proposed by Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021), Sun and
Abraham (2021), and Borusyak et al. (2021) for binary and staggered treatments, under
the parallel trends assumption in Equation (3.1).
3.2.1. The estimators proposed by Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) In a staggered
adoption design, groups can be aggregated into cohorts that start receiving the treatment at the same period. For all c and t, and for all ` ∈ {0, ..., t} let Y c,t denote the
average outcome at period t across groups belonging to cohort c, and let Y n,t denote
the average outcome at period t across groups that remain untreated from period 1 to
T , hereafter referred to as the never-treated groups, assuming for now that such groups
exist. Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) define their parameters of interest as


T Ec,c+` = E Y c,c+` (0c−1 , 1`+1 ) − Y c,c+` (0c+` ) ,
the average effect of having been treated for ` + 1 periods in the cohort that started
receiving the treatment at period c, for every c ∈ {2, ..., T } and ` ≥ 0 such that ` + c ≤ T .
To estimate, say, T Ec,c , Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) propose

DIDc,0 = Y c,c − Y c,c−1 − Y n,c − Y n,c−1 ,
a DID estimator comparing the period c − 1-to-c outcome evolution in cohort c and in
the never-treated groups n. DIDc,0 is unbiased for T Ec,c :


E Y c,c − Y c,c−1 − Y n,c − Y n,c−1


=E Y c,c (0c−1 , 1) − Y c,c−1 (0c−1 ) − Y n,c (0c ) − Y n,c−1 (0c−1 )




=E Y c,c (0c−1 , 1) − Y c,c (0c ) + E Y c,c (0c ) − Y c,c−1 (0c−1 ) − Y n,c (0c ) − Y n,c−1 (0c−1 )


=E Y c,c (0c−1 , 1) − Y c,c (0c ) ,
13 This notation implicitly rules out anticipation effects: the outcome cannot depend on a group’s future
treatment.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

17

where the last equality follows from Equation (3.1). More generally, to estimate T Ec,c+` ,
Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) propose

DIDc,` = Y c,c+` − Y c,c−1 − Y n,c+` − Y n,c−1 ,
a DID estimator comparing the period-c − 1-to-c + ` outcome evolution in cohort c and
in the never-treated groups n.
Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) extend those baseline estimators in various directions.
First, they propose more aggregated estimators, such as DID` , a weighted average of the
DIDc,` estimators across all cohorts reaching ` periods after their first treatment before
the end of the panel. Second, they propose estimators similar to those above, but that
use the not-yet-treated instead of the never-treated as controls. For instance, all groups
not yet treated at period c can be used as control groups in the definition of DIDc,0 .
This is very useful when there is no never-treated group: in that case, the effects T Ec,c+`
can still be estimated, for every c ≥ 2 and ` ≥ 0 such that ` + c ≤ U , where U is
the last period when at least one group is still untreated. Even when there are nevertreated groups, one may worry that such groups are less comparable to groups that get
treated at some point, and researchers sometimes prefer to discard them and only leverage
variation in treatment timing. Finally, even when one is fine with keeping the nevertreated groups, the not-yet-treated is a larger control group, and may lead to more precise
estimators. Note that in staggered adoption designs with a binary treatment, the DIDM
estimator proposed by de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020) also uses the not-yettreated as controls, and is identical to the DID0 estimator of the instantaneous treatment
effect using the not-yet-treated as controls in Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021). Third,
Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) also propose estimators relying on a conditional parallel
trends assumption. Fourth, they suggest placebo estimators to test the parallel trends
assumptions underlying their estimators. These placebos are robust to heterogeneous
effects, unlike the coefficients βb` for ` ≤ −2 from the event-study regression in (2.13).
The estimators proposed by Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) are computed by the
csdid Stata command (see Rios-Avila et al., 2021), and by the did R command (see
Sant’Anna and Callaway, 2021). The basic syntax of the Stata command is
csdid outcome, time(timeid) gvar(cohort)
where cohort is equal to the period when a group starts receiving the treatment.
3.2.2. The estimators proposed by Sun and Abraham (2021) Sun and Abraham (2021)
also propose DID estimators of the cohort-and-period specific effects T Ec,c+` that only
rely on the parallel trends assumption in Equation (3.1), and that are robust to heterogeneous treatment effects. Their estimators either use the never-treated groups as controls,
or the last-treated groups if there are no never-treated. With the former control group,
their estimators of the T Ec,c+` parameters are identical to those proposed by Callaway
and Sant’Anna (2021) with the same control group. Operationally, they show that their
estimators can be computed via a simple linear regression, which may reduce computing
time. Unlike Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021), they do not propose estimators relying on
a conditional parallel trends assumption, and they also do not propose estimators using
the not-yet-treated as controls.
Their estimators are computed by the eventstudyinteract Stata command (see Sun,
2021). Its basic syntax is

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

18

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

eventstudyinteract outcome {rel time list}, absorb(i.groupid i.timeid)
cohort(first treatment) control cohort(controlgroup)
where rel time list is the list of relative-time indicators 1{Fg = t − `} one would
include in the event-study regression in (2.13), first treatment is a variable equal to
the period when group g got treated for the first time, and controlgroup is an indicator
for the control group observations (e.g.: the never treated).
3.2.3. The estimators proposed by Borusyak et al. (2021), Gardner (2021), and Liu et al.
(2021) Borusyak et al. (2021), Gardner (2021), and Liu et al. (2021) have proposed
estimators that may be more efficient than those in Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021)
and Sun and Abraham (2021), under some assumptions. We start by reviewing Borusyak
et al. (2021), before discussing the connection between their results and those in Gardner
(2021) and Liu et al. (2021). The estimators in Borusyak et al. (2021) can be obtained
by running a TWFE regression of the outcome on group and time fixed effects, and
fixed effects for every treated (g, t) cell. To be concrete, if the data has 50 groups, 10
time periods, and 100 treated (g, t) cells, the regression has a constant and 158 fixed
effects (49 for groups, 9 for time periods, and 100 for the treated (g, t) cells). Under
the assumptions of the Gauss-Markov theorem, the coefficients from this regression are
the linear estimators of the population coefficients with the lowest variance. But under
parallel trends, the population coefficient on the fixed effect for treated cell (g, t) is
actually equal to T Eg,t , the ATE in cell (g, t), so the estimators in Borusyak et al. (2021)
are the linear estimators of those ATEs with the lowest variance. With estimators of
T Eg,t in hand, one can estimate T Ec,c+` as the average of all the T Eg,t s such that group
g started receiving the treatment at period c and t = c + `. Again, Gauss-Markov ensures
that this estimator is the best linear estimator of T Ec,c+` . As the estimators in Callaway
and Sant’Anna (2021) and Sun and Abraham (2021) are also linear estimators, those in
Borusyak et al. (2021) have a lower variance.
A second, numerically equivalent way of computing the estimators in Borusyak et al.
(2021) amounts to fitting a regression of the outcome on group and time fixed effects in the
sample of untreated observations, and using that regression to predict the counterfactual
outcome of treated observations. Estimates of the treatment effect of those observations
are then merely obtained by substracting their counterfactual to their actual outcome.
This imputation method is computationally faster than the first. It also readily generalizes to more complicated specifications, such as triple-differences, or models allowing for
group-specific linear trends. Using this representation of their estimator, Borusyak et al.
(2021) show that it can also be used to estimate the effect of a binary and non-staggered
treatment, if that treatment does not have dynamic effects. This imputation method is
the one used by the did imputation Stata command (see Borusyak, 2021) and by the
didimputation R command (see Butts, 2021) to compute the estimators proposed by
Borusyak et al. (2021). The basic syntax of the Stata command is:
did imputation outcome groupid timeid first treatment,
where first treatment is a variable equal to the period when group g first got treated.
Before Borusyak et al. (2021), Liu et al. (2021) and Gardner (2021) have proposed the
same imputation method as in Borusyak et al. (2021),14 but the result showing that the
14 Even before that, Gobillon and Magnac (2016) have proposed a similar strategy to estimate treatment
effects under a factor model.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

19

resulting estimators are efficient under the assumptions of the Gauss-Markov theorem
only appears in Borusyak et al. (2021). Note that Wooldridge (2021) has also proposed
an estimation strategy connected, and in some cases numerically equivalent, to that of
Borusyak et al. (2021).
3.2.4. Understanding the differences between those estimators Under parallel trends,
the estimators in Borusyak et al. (2021) may offer precision gains with respect to those
in Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) or Sun and Abraham (2021), under the assumptions
of the Gauss-Markov theorem. Those require, among other things, that the never treated
potential outcomes Yg,t (0t ) be independent of each other, both across groups and over
time. It is, of course, often implausible that the potential outcomes of the same group
are uncorrelated over time. With serial correlation, it is no longer guaranteed that the
estimators in Borusyak et al. (2021) will always be more efficient than those in Callaway
and Sant’Anna (2021) and Sun and Abraham (2021), but simulations in Borusyak et al.
(2021) suggest that one can still expect efficiency gains with moderate serial correlation.
If trends are not exactly parallel, the estimators in Borusyak et al. (2021) may be more
or less biased than those in Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) or Sun and Abraham (2021)
depending on the nature of the violation of parallel trends. Borusyak et al. (2021) do not
provide a closed-form of their estimators, but one can show that with only one treated
group s, which starts to receive the treatment at period ts , their estimator of that group’s
treatment effect at ts + ` is
!
ts −1
ts −1
1 X
1 X
1 X
Ys,k −
Yg,k ,
Yg,ts +` −
(3.2)
Ys,ts +` −
ts − 1
G−1
ts − 1
k=1

g6=s

k=1

while the estimator in Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) and Sun and Abraham (2021) is
1 X
Ys,ts +` − Ys,ts −1 −
(Yg,ts +` − Yg,ts −1 ) .
(3.3)
G−1
g6=s

Equation (3.3) shows that the estimator in Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) and Sun and
Abraham (2021) use groups’ ts − 1 outcome, the last period before s gets treated, as
the baseline outcome, while Equation (3.2) shows that the estimator in Borusyak et al.
(2021) instead uses the average outcome from period 1 to ts − 1 as the baseline. This
is why the latter estimator is often more precise. However, it is also more biased, when
parallel trends does not exactly hold and the discrepancy between groups’ trends gets
larger over longer horizons, as would for instance happen when there are group-specific
linear trends. In such instances, Roth (2021) notes that leveraging earlier pre-treatment
periods increases the bias of a DID estimator, since one makes comparisons from earlier
periods. If, on the other hand, parallel trends fails due to anticipation effects arising a
few periods before ts , Equations (3.2) and (3.3) imply that the estimator in Borusyak
et al. (2021) is less biased than that in Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) and Sun and
Abraham (2021). However, these two types of violations of parallel trends may not be
equally problematic. Often times, both estimators can be immunized against anticipation
effects, by redefining ts as the date when the treatment was announced. On the other
hand, it is often harder to immunize them against differential trends widening over time
(see de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille, 2021a, for further discussion). Beyond the
simple example we consider here, deriving a closed-form expression of the estimators in

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

20

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

Borusyak et al. (2021) is not straightforward. Whether the conclusions we derive in this
simple example carry through to more complicated designs is thus an open question.
If one views parallel trends as a reasonable first-order approximation rather than an
assumption that holds exactly, it may make sense to investigate how sensitive one’s
findings are to violations of parallel trends. To do so, one may for instance implement
the partial identification approach in Manski and Pepper (2018) or Rambachan and Roth
(2019). The latter approach assumes that parallel trends do not hold exactly, and that
the magnitude of placebo estimators is informative as to the magnitude of the bias in the
actual estimators caused by differential trends. The estimators proposed by Callaway and
Sant’Anna (2021) and Sun and Abraham (2021) may be more amenable to the approach
in Rambachan and Roth (2019) than the estimators proposed by Borusyak et al. (2021).
Consider again the same simple example as above. For any ` ≤ ts − 2, one can construct
the following placebo estimator:
1 X
(Yg,ts −1 − Yg,ts −`−2 ) .
(3.4)
Ys,ts −1 − Ys,ts −`−2 −
G−1
g6=s

This placebo compares the treated and control groups’ outcome evolution, from period
ts − ` − 2 to ts − 1, namely over ` + 1 periods before group s got treated. It exactly
mimicks the estimator of group s’s treatment effect at period ts + ` proposed by Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) and Sun and Abraham (2021), which compares the same
groups, over the same number of periods. Accordingly, the magnitude of that placebo
may indeed be informative as to the magnitude of the bias of the estimator in Equation
(3.3), as requested by Rambachan and Roth (2019). Building a placebo that would similarly mimick the estimator proposed by Borusyak et al. (2021) is not feasible, precisely
because that estimator leverages all pre-treatment periods to construct its baseline. See
de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) for more discussion of the advantages of
having placebos that mimick actual estimators.
Another difference between these approaches is that Borusyak et al. (2021) impose
parallel trends for every group and between every pair of consecutive time periods.15
Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021), on the other hand, impose a weaker parallel trends assumption: from period c onwards, cohort c must be on the same trend as the never-treated
groups, but before that cohort c may have been on a different trend. The assumption in
Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) is the minimal assumption ensuring that all the T Ec,c+`
can be unbiasedly estimated, but it is conditional on the design: which groups are required to be on parallel trends at which dates depends on groups’ realized treatments. It
is also not testable. We refer the reader to Marcus and Sant’Anna (2021) and Borusyak
et al. (2021) for further discussion on the differences between parallel trends assumptions.
Overall, whether the estimators in Borusyak et al. (2021) should be preferred to those
in Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) and Sun and Abraham (2021) may depend on one’s
degree of confidence in the parallel trends assumption, on the type of violations of this
assumption that seems more likely to arise in the application at hand, on whether it is
possible to immunize the estimators against anticipation effects by redefining the treatment date as the announcement date, and on one’s willingness to undertake a sensitivity
analysis such as the one proposed by Rambachan and Roth (2019). Note also that if
15 de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020) and Sun and Abraham (2021) also impose that assumption.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

21

the estimators proposed by Borusyak et al. (2021), Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021), and
Sun and Abraham (2021) are significantly different, this implies that the parallel trends
assumption, at least the “strong version” of this assumption imposed by Borusyak et al.
(2021) and Sun and Abraham (2021), must be violated.
3.3. Estimators allowing for dynamic effects when the treatment is not binary or the
design is not staggered.
de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) propose treatment effect estimators robust
to heterogeneous and dynamic treatment effects and that can be used even if the treatment is not binary or the design is not staggered. In their survey of 26 highly cited
2015-2019 AER papers using a TWFE regression, they find that 4 have a binary treatment and a staggered design, so being able to accommodate more general designs is
important. The paper’s main idea is to propose a generalization of the event-study approach to such designs, by defining the event as the period where a group’s treatment
changes for the first time. With a binary-and-staggered treatment, the event per this definition is the period where a group gets treated, so this definition extends the standard
one to general designs.
More specifically, de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) start by showing that
for any group g whose treatment changed for the first time at period Fg , the instantaneous
and dynamic effects of that change can be unbiasedly estimated. Let
δg,` = E(Yg,Fg +` − Yg,Fg +` (Dg,1 , ..., Dg,1 ))
be the expected difference between group g’s actual outcome at Fg + ` and the counterfactual “status quo” outcome it would have obtained if its treatment had remained equal
c
to its period-one value from period one to Fg + `. Let Ng,`
denote the number of groups
whose treatment has not changed yet at Fg + `, and with the same treatment as g at
period one. de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) show that
X
1
(Yg0 ,Fg +` − Yg0 ,Fg −1 ),
DIDg,` = Yg,Fg +` − Yg,Fg −1 − c
Ng,` 0
g :Dg0 ,1 =Dg,1 ,Fg0 >Fg +`

a DID estimator comparing the Fg − 1-to-Fg + ` outcome evolution between group g and
groups whose treatment has not changed yet at Fg + ` and with the same treatment
as g at period one, is unbiased for δg,` under parallel trends assumptions. To test those
parallel trends assumptions, they propose placebo estimators comparing the outcome
trends of switchers and non-switchers before the switchers switch.
Then, de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) aggregate the DIDg,` estimators
into an estimator of the effect of having experienced a weakly higher amount of treatment
for ` periods. For any real number x and t ∈ {1, ..., T }, let xt denote a 1 × t vector with
coordinates equal to x. When the treatment is binary, for groups untreated at period
one, Dg,1 = 0, so
δg,` = E(Yg,Fg +` (0Fg −1 , 1, Dg,Fg +1 , ..., Dg,Fg +` ) − Yg,Fg +` (0Fg +` )).
For groups treated at period one, Dg,1 = 1, so
−δg,` = E(Yg,Fg +` (1Fg +` ) − Yg,Fg +` (1Fg −1 , 0, Dg,Fg +1 , ..., Dg,Fg +` )).
The right-hand side of the two equations above are effects of having experienced a weakly

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

22

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

higher amount of treatment for ` + 1 periods. Accordingly, the DIDg,` estimators are
aggregated into a DID` estimator, multiplying by minus one the DIDg,` of groups treated
at period one. With a non-binary treatment, one can also aggregate the DIDg,` to estimate
the effect of having experienced a weakly higher amount of treatment for ` + 1 periods.
Ultimately, this approach leads to an event-study graph, with the distance to the
first treatment change on the x-axis, the DID` estimators on the y-axis to the right of
zero, and placebo estimators on the y-axis to the left of zero. This event-study graph
is useful to test the parallel trends assumption, and to provide reduced-form evidence
of whether weakly increasing the treatment for ` + 1 periods increases or decreases the
outcome on average. However, interpreting the magnitude of the DID` estimators might
be complicated. For instance, with three periods and three groups such that (D1,1 =
0, D1,2 = 4, D1,3 = 1), (D2,1 = 0, D2,2 = 2, D2,3 = 3), and (D2,1 = 0, D2,2 = 0, D2,3 =
0), DID1 estimates the average of E(Y1,3 (0, 4, 1) − Y1,3 (0, 0, 0)) and E(Y2,3 (0, 2, 3) −
Y2,3 (0, 0, 0)). Accordingly, DID1 does not estimate by how much the outcome increases
on average when the treatment increases by a given amount for a given number of periods.
To circumvent this important limitation, two strategies can be implemented. First, the
reduced-form event-study graph described above can be complemented with a first-stage
event-study graph, where the outcome is replaced by the treatment. The estimators
on the first-stage graph show the average value of |Dg,Fg +` − Dg,1 | across all groups
entering in DID` . In the example above, the first two estimates on the first-stage graph
are equal to 1/2(D1,2 − D1,1 + D2,2 − D2,1 ) = 3 and 1/2(D1,3 − D1,1 + D2,3 − D2,1 ) = 2.
This reflects the fact that in this example, DID1 is an effect produced by increasing the
previous and current treatment by 3 and 2 units on average. Second, a weighted average
across ` of the reduced-form estimators divided by a weighted average across ` of the
first-stage estimators is unbiased for a parameter with a clear economic interpretation.
That parameter may be used to conduct a cost-benefit analysis comparing groups’ actual
treatments to the status quo scenario where they would have kept all along the same
treatment as in period one. In other words, that parameter can be used to determine if
the policy changes that took place over the duration of the panel led to a better situation
than the one that would have prevailed if no policy change had been undertaken, a natural
policy question. Importantly, that parameter can also be interpreted as an average total
effect per unit of treatment, where “total effect” refers to the sum of the instantaneous
and dynamic effects of a treatment.
The estimators proposed by de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) are computed
by the did multiplegt Stata and R commands. To compute those estimators rather than
those proposed in de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020), the Stata command’s basic
syntax is:
did multiplegt outcome groupid timeid treatment, robust dynamic dynamic(#)
average effect placebo(#) longdiff placebo breps(#) cluster(groupid),
where dynamic(#) specifies the horizon over which effects of a first treatment switch
have to be estimated, and placebo(#) specifies the number of placebos to be estimated.
The estimators in de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) can be used with a
binary treatment switching on and off, with a discrete treatment, or with a continuous
and staggered treatment (groups start getting treated at different dates, with differing
intensities, but once a group gets treated its treatment intensity never changes). The

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

23

estimators proposed by Callaway et al. (2021) can also accommodate continuous and
staggered treatments. For continuous and non-staggered treatments, in their Section 4.3
de Chaisemartin et al. (2022) extend their baseline estimators to allow for dynamic effects.
With respect to their baseline estimators, the main difference is that when allowing for
dynamic effects, fewer units can be used as controls. Without dynamic effects, at period
t, any unit whose treatment has not changed between t − 1 and t can be used as a
valid control. With dynamic effects, only units whose treatments have not changed from
period 1 to t can be used as valid controls. Therefore, the need for “stayers” becomes
even stronger when allowing for dynamic effects: many units need to keep the same value
of the treatment for a large number of time periods. Developing estimators robust to
dynamic effects that can be used with a continuous treatment and no stayers has not
been done yet and is a promising area for future research.
The estimators in de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) can, of course, also
be used with a binary and staggered treatment. Without covariates in the estimation,
they are then equivalent to the estimators proposed by Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021)
using the not-yet-treated as controls. With covariates, the estimators in Callaway and
Sant’Anna (2021) and de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) differ. Callaway and
Sant’Anna (2021) consider time-invariant covariates, and assume that trends are parallel
once we condition on them. de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) instead consider
time-varying covariates and assume that trends are parallel once the linear effect of those
time-varying covariates on the outcome is accounted for. This for instance allows them to
include group-specific linear trends in the estimation. With covariates, the parallel trends
conditions in Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) and de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille
(2021a) are not nested, and in principle one could combine both.
Finally, it is worth noting that de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021b) propose
estimators for the case with several treatments. They propose both estimators that generalize the DIDM estimator in de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020) and rule out
dynamic effects, and estimators that generalize those in Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021)
and allow for dynamic effects.
4. APPLICATION
In this section, we revisit an application with a binary and staggered treatment, thus allowing us to compute several of the heterogeneity-robust DID estimators reviewed above.
Between 1968 and 1988, 29 US states adopted a unilateral divorce law (UDL). Wolfers
(2006a), building upon Friedberg (1998), studies the effects of those laws on divorce rates,
using a version of the event-study regression in (2.13). We use his data (Wolfers, 2006b)
to revisit this question. In what follows, estimates are weighted by states’ populations
and standard errors are clustered at the state level, as in Wolfers (2006a). As the author
estimates UDLs’ dynamic effects up to 15 years after adoption, in our replication we focus on heterogeneity-robust DID estimators allowing for dynamic effects, and present the
estimated effects over the same horizon. We use Stata for this replication exercise, and
the versions of the twowayfeweights, eventstudyinteract, csdid, did imputation,
and did multiplegt commands available from the SSC repository at the end of April
2022.
Figure 3 below shows the instantaneous and dynamic effects of passing a UDL, according to six estimation methods. In the top-left panel, we show the estimates from the

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

24

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

event-study regression in (2.13), with L = 15, K = 10, and endpoint binning. According
to this regression, UDLs increase the divorce rate on the year when the law is passed
and for seven years thereafter. 11 years after those laws are passed, their effect becomes
significantly negative. Those effects are consistent with those in Column (1) of Table
2 of Wolfers (2006a). Our event-study regression and that in Wolfers (2006a) differ on
two dimensions: Wolfers (2006a) does not include any placebo indicator for pre-adoption
periods, and he includes post-adoption indicators for bins of two years (one indicator for
the year when the law is passed and the year after that, one indicator for the second and
third years after the law is passed, etc.). Results seem fairly robust to those specification choices. The placebo estimates are small, and individually and jointly insignificant
(F-test p-value=0.863).
We follow Sun and Abraham (2021), and compute the weights attached to UDLs’
instantaneous effect in this event-study regression.16 As shown in Equation (2.14), this
coefficient can be decomposed as the sum of two terms. The first term is a weighted
sum of UDL’s effects in the year when they are passed, across 27 states, where all effects
receive a positive weight. The weights are negatively correlated with the year variable
(correlation=−0.232), so this first term upweights UDLs’ instantaneous effects in states
passing a law early, and downweights UDLs’ instantaneous effects in states passing a
law late. Accordingly, this first term may differ from the average instantaneous effects
of UDLs if those effects vary between early- and late-adopting states, but it at least
estimates a convex combination of effects. The second term is a weighted sum of UDLs’
effects in the years after they are passed. 29 effects of having passed a UDL a year ago
enter in that second term. 16 enter with a positive weight, and 13 enter with a negative
weight. The positive and negative weights respectively sum to 0.012 and −0.012. 28 effects
of having passed a UDL two years ago enter in that second term. 10 effects enter with a
positive weight, and 18 enter with a negative weight. The positive and negative weights
respectively sum to 0.010 and −0.010. Effects of having passed a UDL three, four, ...,
14, and more than 15 years ago also enter in that second term. In total, the positive and
negative weights in that second term respectively sum to around 0.064 and −0.064. If
UDLs’ dynamic effects vary across states, that second term may not be equal to zero, thus
further biasing the estimated instantaneous effect in the event-study regression. However,
those contamination weights are not very large, so this bias is likely to be small. Overall,
this event-study regression seems fairly robust to heterogeneous treatment effects.
In the top-centre panel of Figure 3, we use the eventstudyinteract command to
compute the estimators proposed by Sun and Abraham (2021). The estimated effects
are very similar to those in the top-left panel. This could either be due to the fact that
UDLs effects are not very heterogeneous, or to the fact that the event-study regression
is fairly robust to heterogeneous treatment effects, as suggested above. Interestingly, the
confidence intervals are, if anything, slightly wider in the top-left than in the top-centre
panel of Figure 3, thus showing that heterogeneity-robust DID estimators are not always
less precise than TWFE estimators. The placebos are individually insignificant. They
are also substantially smaller than the estimated effects of UDLs: it does not seem that
violations of parallel trends can fully account for those estimated effects.
In the top-right panel of Figure 3, we use the csdid command to compute the estima16 In practice, we use the twowayfeweights Stata command, which has an option to compute the correlation between the weights and other variables that we use below.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

25

tors proposed by Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021), using the “not-yet-treated” states as
the control group. The estimated effects are very similar to those in the top-centre panel.
19 states never adopt a UDL over the period under consideration, so the group of “nevertreated” states used as controls by eventstudyinteract is quite large, and accounts for
a relatively large fraction of the group of “not-yet-treated” states used as controls by
csdid. This may explain why in this application, the two commands yield very similar
estimates. Using the larger control group of “not-yet-treated” states also does not lead
to markedly more precise estimates: the widths of the confidence intervals are similar
in the two panels. The placebos produced by csdid are small and individually insignificant. The placebos are much smaller in the top-right than in the top-centre panel. This
is because csdid computes first-difference placebos, comparing the outcome evolution
of treated and not-yet treated states, before the treated start receiving the treatment,
and between pairs of consecutive periods.17 On the other hand, eventstudyinteract
computes long-difference placebos. For instance, the second placebo, shown at t = −3
on the graph, compares the outcome evolution of treated and never-treated states, from
Fg − 1, the period before the treated start getting treated, to Fg − 3. See de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) for a discussion of the respective advantages of longand first-difference placebos.
In the bottom-left panel of Figure 3, we use the did imputation command to compute
the estimators proposed by Borusyak et al. (2021). The effects are very similar to those
found by the previous two estimators. The confidence interval of the instantaneous effect
is much tighter in the bottom-left panel than in all other panels: for that treatment
effect, the estimator proposed by Borusyak et al. (2021) does lead to a large precision
gain. However, the opposite can hold when one considers dynamic effects. For instance,
the confidence interval of the effect two years after passing a UDL is more than 50%
larger per did imputation than per csdid. Accordingly, the estimators proposed by
Borusyak et al. (2021) do not always lead to precision gains, relative to those proposed
by Sun and Abraham (2021) or Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021). The placebos produced
by did imputation are small, individually insignificant, and jointly insignificant (F-test
p-value = 0.541).18 Note that the placebos computed by did imputation are different
from those computed by the other commands. Essentially, the command estimates a
TWFE regression among all the untreated (g, t), with K leads of the treatment. To be
consistent with the other estimations, we run the command with 9 leads. Then, everything
is relative to 10 periods prior to treatment, which is why the placebo estimate is set to
0 at t = −10 in the bottom-left panel, instead of at t = −1 in the other panels.
In the bottom-centre panel of Figure 3, we use the did multiplegt command to
compute the estimators proposed by de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a). The
resulting estimates are extremely close to those produced by the csdid command. The
only reason why the two sets of estimates are not identical is that the estimation is
weighted by states’ population, and the two commands seem to handle weights slightly
differently. Without weighting, the two sets of estimates are identical, as expected given
that there are no covariates in the estimation and we used csdid with the not-yet-treated
17 csdid has an option to compute long-difference placebos, but it returned an error when we used it.
18 We did not report a joint test that all placebos are equal to 0 based on eventstudyinteract: this
command does not readily allow to compute this test, as it does not return the covariances between the
estimators. Similarly, csdid does not allow to jointly test if the placebos in Figure 3 are significant: it
computes a joint nullity test, but for more disaggregated placebos.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

26

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

as controls. The placebos computed by did multiplegt are long-difference placebos,
similar to those computed by eventstudyinteract, except that did multiplegt uses
the not-yet-treated as controls. They are small, and individually and jointly insignificant
(F-test p-value = 0.427).

Figure 3. Effects of Unilateral Divorce Laws, using the data in Wolfers (2006a)

-.5

Effect
0

.5

Callaway & Sant'Anna

-1

-.5

Effect
0

.5

Sun & Abraham

-1

-1

-.5

Effect
0

.5

TWFE estimates

-10 -5
0
5
10 15
Relative time to change in law

Borusyak, Jaravel & Spiess

dC&DH w/o lin. trends

dC&DH with lin. trends

Effect
0
-.5

Effect
0

-1

-.5
-1

-1

-.5

Effect
0

.5

.5

-10 -5
0
5
10 15
Relative time to change in law

.5

-10 -5
0
5
10 15
Relative time to change in law

-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Relative time to change in law

-10 -5
0
5
10 15
Relative time to change in law

-10 -5
0
5
10
15
Relative time to change in law

Note: This figure shows the estimated effects of Unilateral Divorce Laws on the divorce rate and placebo
estimates, using the data in Wolfers (2006a) and six estimation methods. In the top-left panel, we show
estimated effects per the event-study regression in (2.13), with L = 15, K = 10, and endpoint binning.
In the top-centre (resp. top-right, bottom-left, bottom-centre) panel, we show estimated effects per the
eventstudyinteract (resp. csdid, did imputation, did multiplegt) Stata command. In the bottomright panel, we show estimated effects per the did multiplegt Stata command, controlling for statespecific linear trends. All estimations are weighted by states’ populations. Standard errors are clustered
at the state level. 95% confidence intervals relying on a normal approximation are shown in red.

The estimates discussed so far do not control for state-specific linear trends. Whether
such trends should or should not be included to estimate the effect of UDLs has been a
debated issue in this literature, with Friedberg (1998) arguing in their favor, and Wolfers
(2006a) arguing that they may conflate dynamic effects. The results presented so far
already suggest that including state-specific linear trends is unnecessary, as placebos
are small and insignificant without them. To confirm that, we run the did multiplegt

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

27

command again, controlling for state-specific linear trends.19 The results, displayed in the
bottom-right panel of Figure 3, show that results are fairly insensitive to the inclusion of
state-linear trends. If anything, adding them makes the estimated long-run effects more
noisy. The only argument in favor of state-specific trends is that the placebos are slightly
smaller with them, though the difference is most likely insignificant.
Finally, to synthetize our results and obtain a point estimate that can be compared to
the results in Wolfers (2006a), we average UDL’s effects from the year the law is passed to
seven years thereafter. The results are displayed in Table 1. We do not include therein the
estimates from the eventstudyinteract and csdid commands, as one cannot readily
obtain the standard error of this average effect from these commands. The results show
that according to all estimation methods, UDLs positively affect the divorce rate from
the year the law is passed to seven years thereafter. All estimates are fairly similar to each
other and point towards an increase of 20%. The estimated standard error is substantially
lower using the author’s original specification, which is not surprising as it is less flexible
than the other estimation methods. The estimated standard error is slightly larger using
Borusyak et al. (2021) than the flexible event-study regression or the estimators proposed
by de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a).

Table 1. The short-run effects of Unilateral Divorce Laws

Wolfers (2006a)
Event-study without binning pairs of years
Borusyak et al. (2021)
de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a), no linear trends
de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a), linear trends

0.200
(0.056)
0.249
(0.106)
0.198
(0.129)
0.185
(0.107)
0.219
(0.096)

Note: This table shows the estimated effects of Unilateral Divorce Laws on the divorce rate, from 0
to 7 years after adoption, using the data in Wolfers (2006a). The first set of estimates is based on the
regression in Column (2) of Table 2 of Wolfers (2006a). The second (resp. third, fourth) set of estimates
is based on the results shown in the bottom-left (resp. bottom-centre, bottom-right) panel of Figure 3.
All estimations are weighted by states’ populations. Standard errors, clustered at the state level, are
shown beneath each estimate, between parentheses.

5. CONCLUSION, AND AVENUES FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
The literature reviewed in this survey has shown that TWFE regressions may not always
estimate a convex combination of treatment effects. In such cases, it may be hard to give
them a causal interpretation, as TWFE coefficients could for instance be of a different sign
than every unit’s treatment effect. Table 2 below summarizes the alternative estimators
available to applied researchers, depending on their research design and on whether they
19 csdid does not allow for group-specific trends. did imputation allows in principle for such trends but
returned an error when such trends were added. eventstudyinteract allows for such trends.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

28

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

are ready or not to rule out dynamic effects. The table shows that the literature so
far has mostly focused on providing alternative estimators for the case with a binary
treatment and staggered adoption. Heterogeneity-robust DID estimators that can be
used in more complicated designs are scarce, while many applications where TWFE
regressions have been used either do not have a staggered design, or do not have a binary
treatment. Developing more estimators that can be used in such designs is a promising
avenue for future research. This can often be done by building upon the insights gained
from studying the binary-and-staggered case. For instance, the estimators proposed by
de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a) build upon those proposed by Callaway and
Sant’Anna (2021) for the binary-and-staggered case. We hope that the whirlwind of DID
working papers shall continue, till heterogeneity-robust DID estimators are as widely
applicable as TWFE regressions.
It is also important to stress that at this stage, it is still unclear whether researchers
should systematically abandon TWFE estimators. Those estimators sometimes estimate
a convex combination of effects under the parallel trends assumption, they may estimate
the ATT if the weights attached to them are uncorrelated with the treatment effects
T Eg,t , and they often have a lower variance than the heterogeneity-robust estimators reviewed in the previous section. While there are examples where TWFE and heterogeneityrobust DID estimators are economically and statistically different (see, e.g., the empirical
examples in de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille, 2020, 2021a,b; Baker et al., 2022), the
previous section also shows a data set where TWFE and heterogeneity-robust DID estimators lead to very similar conclusions. Understanding the circumstances where TWFE
and heterogeneity-robust DID estimators are more likely to differ is an important question. We conjecture that differences are likely to be larger in complicated designs (e.g.:
a non-binary treatment that can turn on and off multiple times, or several treatments)
than in simple designs (e.g.: a single binary and staggered treatment). This conjecture is
based on our discussion of Equation (2.3) in Section 3. This is also a pattern we found
when computing TWFE and heterogeneity-robust DID estimators in four different data
sets, in the empirical examples of this survey and of de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille
(2020; 2021a; 2021b). But those examples are not enough to draw general conclusions:
a systematic comparison of TWFE and heterogeneity-robust DID estimators in a broad
set of applications is in order.
Analyzing estimators’ robustness to heterogeneous treatment effects is important, as
the assumption that all units are affected in the same way by a treatment is seldom credible. In this survey, we have focused on estimators relying on parallel trends assumptions,
but this question is also relevant for other estimators. See for instance Sloczyński (2020)
and Blandhol et al. (2022) for instrumental variables estimators with covariates. More
closely related to our set-up, the impact of heterogeneous treatment effects in the “group
fixed-effects” model of Bonhomme and Manresa (2015) remains to be studied.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

29

Table 2. A summary of available heterogeneity-robust DID estimators

Panel A: Estimators ruling out dynamic effects
Can be used when outcome unaffected by past treatments
Treatment

Estimators available

Stata commands

See:

Binary

de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020)
Imai and Kim (2021)
Borusyak et al. (2021)

did multiplegt
did imputation

3.1
3.1
3.2.3

Discrete

de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020)

did multiplegt

3.1

Continuous,
with stayers

de Chaisemartin et al. (2022)

See Section 3.1

3.1

Continuous,
without stayers

de Chaisemartin et al. (2022)
Graham and Powell (2012)
Chamberlain (1992)

See Section 3.1
gmm
gmm

3.1
3.1
3.1

Several treatments

de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021b)

did multiplegt

3.3

Panel B: Estimators allowing dynamic effects
Can be used when outcome affected by past treatments
Treatment

Estimators available

Stata commands

See:

Binary and
staggered

Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021)
Sun and Abraham (2021)
Borusyak et al. (2021)
de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a)

csdid
eventstudyinteract
did imputation
did multiplegt

3.2.1
3.2.2
3.2.3
3.3

Binary or discrete,
non-staggered

de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a)

did multiplegt

3.3

Continuous and
staggered

de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021a)
Callaway et al. (2021)

did multiplegt

3.3
3.3

Continuous and
non-staggered,
with stayers

de Chaisemartin et al. (2022)

See paper

3.3

Continuous and
non-staggered,
without stayers

No estimator available yet

Several treatments

de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2021b)

did multiplegt

3.3

Note: All the Stata commands have R equivalents with the same name, except eventstudyinteract
that does not have an R equivalent, and csdid whose R equivalent is called did. The table’s last column
indicates the section of the paper where the estimator is described.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

30

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are very grateful to Francesco Armillei, Kirill Borusyak, Bruno Ferman, Xavier
Jaravel, Roberto Ramos, Jonathan Roth, Jann Spiess, Gonzalo Vazquez-Bare, Kaspar
Wüthrich, Jaap Abbring (the editor) and two anonymous referees for their helpful comments.
REFERENCES
Abadie, A. (2005, 01). Semiparametric difference-in-differences estimators. Review of
Economic Studies 72 (1), 1–19.
Athey, S. and G. W. Imbens (2022). Design-based analysis in difference-in-differences
settings with staggered adoption. Journal of Econometrics 226, 62–79.
Baker, A. C., D. F. Larcker, and C. C. Wang (2022). How much should we trust staggered
difference-in-differences estimates? Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2), 370–395.
Bilinski, A. and L. A. Hatfield (2018). Nothing to see here? non-inferiority approaches
to parallel trends and other model assumptions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.03273.
Blandhol, C., J. Bonney, M. Mogstad, and A. Torgovitsky (2022). When is tsls actually
late? NBER working paper 29709.
Bojinov, I., A. Rambachan, and N. Shephard (2021). Panel experiments and dynamic
causal effects: A finite population perspective. Quantitative Economics 12, 1171–1196.
Bonhomme, S. and E. Manresa (2015). Grouped patterns of heterogeneity in panel data.
Econometrica 83 (3), 1147–1184.
Borusyak, K. (2021, June). DID IMPUTATION: Stata module to perform treatment
effect estimation and pre-trend testing in event studies.
Borusyak, K. and X. Jaravel (2017). Revisiting event study designs. Working Paper.
Borusyak, K., X. Jaravel, and J. Spiess (2021). Revisiting event study designs: Robust
and efficient estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.12419.
Butts, K. (2021, August). didimputation: Imputation Estimator from Borusyak, Jaravel,
and Spiess (2021) in R.
Callaway, B., A. Goodman-Bacon, and P. H. Sant’Anna (2021). Difference-in-differences
with a continuous treatment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.02637.
Callaway, B. and P. H. Sant’Anna (2021). Difference-in-differences with multiple time
periods. Journal of Econometrics 225, 200–230.
Chamberlain, G. (1992). Efficiency bounds for semiparametric regression. Econometrica 60 (3), 567–596.
Chernozhukov, V., I. Fernández-Val, J. Hahn, and W. Newey (2013). Average and quantile effects in nonseparable panel models. Econometrica 81 (2), 535–580.
de Chaisemartin, C. and X. D’Haultfœuille (2015). Fuzzy differences-in-differences.
ArXiv e-prints, eprint 1510.01757v2.
de Chaisemartin, C. and X. D’Haultfœuille (2018). Fuzzy differences-in-differences. The
Review of Economic Studies 85 (2), 999–1028.
de Chaisemartin, C. and X. D’Haultfœuille (2020). Two-way fixed effects estimators with
heterogeneous treatment effects. American Economic Review 110 (9), 2964–2996.
de Chaisemartin, C. and X. D’Haultfœuille (2021a). Difference-in-differences estimators
of intertemporal treatment effects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.04267.
de Chaisemartin, C. and X. D’Haultfœuille (2021b). Two-way fixed effects regressions
with several treatments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.10077.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

TWFE and DID with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

31

de Chaisemartin, C., X. D’Haultfœuille, and A. Deeb (2019, February). twowayfeweights:
Estimation of the Weights Attached to the Two-Way Fixed Effects Regressions in
Stata.
de Chaisemartin, C., X. D’Haultfœuille, and Y. Guyonvarch (2019, May). did multiplegt:
DID Estimation with Multiple Groups and Periods in Stata.
de Chaisemartin, C., X. D’Haultfoeuille, F. Pasquier, and G. Vazquez-Bare (2022).
Difference-in-differences estimators of the effect of a continuous treatment. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2201.06898.
Flack, E. and Edward (2020, January). bacondecomp: Goodman-Bacon Decomposition
in R.
Freyaldenhoven, S., C. Hansen, and J. M. Shapiro (2019). Pre-event trends in the panel
event-study design. American Economic Review 109 (9), 3307–38.
Friedberg, L. (1998). Did unilateral divorce raise divorce rates? evidence from panel data.
The American Economic Review 88 (3), 608–627.
Gardner, J. (2021). Two-stage differences in differences. Working paper.
Gentzkow, M., J. M. Shapiro, and M. Sinkinson (2011). The effect of newspaper entry
and exit on electoral politics. American Economic Review 101 (7), 2980–3018.
Gobillon, L. and T. Magnac (2016). Regional policy evaluation: Interactive fixed effects
and synthetic controls. Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (3), 535–551.
Goodman-Bacon, A. (2021). Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing.
Journal of Econometrics 225, 254–277.
Goodman-Bacon, A., T. Goldring, and A. Nichols (2019, July). BACONDECOMP: Stata
module to perform a Bacon decomposition of difference-in-differences estimation.
Graham, B. S. and J. L. Powell (2012). Identification and estimation of average partial
effects in “irregular” correlated random coefficient panel data models. Econometrica 80 (5), 2105–2152.
Imai, K. and I. S. Kim (2021). On the use of two-way fixed effects regression models for
causal inference with panel data. Political Analysis 29 (3), 405–415.
Jakiela, P. (2021). Simple diagnostics for two-way fixed effects. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.13229.
Jordà, Ò. (2005). Estimation and inference of impulse responses by local projections.
American economic review 95 (1), 161–182.
Kahn-Lang, A. and K. Lang (2020). The promise and pitfalls of differences-in-differences:
Reflections on 16 and pregnant and other applications. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 38 (3), 613–620.
Liu, L., Y. Wang, and Y. Xu (2021). A practical guide to counterfactual estimators for
causal inference with time-series cross-sectional data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.00856.
Manski, C. F. and J. V. Pepper (2018). How do right-to-carry laws affect crime rates?
coping with ambiguity using bounded-variation assumptions. Review of Economics
and Statistics 100 (2), 232–244.
Marcus, M. and P. H. Sant’Anna (2021). The role of parallel trends in event study
settings: An application to environmental economics. Journal of the Association of
Environmental and Resource Economists 8 (2), 235–275.
Rambachan, A. and J. Roth (2019). An honest approach to parallel trends. Working
paper.
Rios-Avila, F., P. Sant’Anna, and B. Callaway (2021). Csdid: Stata module for the
estimation of difference-in-difference models with multiple time periods.
Roth, J. (2021). Pre-test with caution: Event-study estimates after testing for parallel
trends. American Economic Review: Insights forthcoming.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

32

C. de Chaisemartin and X. D’Haultfœuille

Roth, J. and P. H. Sant’Anna (2021). Efficient estimation for staggered rollout designs.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01291.
Roth, J., P. H. Sant’Anna, A. Bilinski, and J. Poe (2022). What’s trending in differencein-differences? a synthesis of the recent econometrics literature. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.01194.
Sant’Anna, P. and B. Callaway (2021, December). did: Treatment effects with multiple
periods and groups in r.
Schmidheiny, K. and S. Siegloch (2020). On event studies and distributed-lags in two-way
fixed effects models: Identification, equivalence, and generalization. ZEW Discussion
Paper 20-01.
Sloczyński, T. (2020). When should we (not) interpret linear iv estimands as late? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2011.06695.
Stevenson, B. and J. Wolfers (2006). Bargaining in the shadow of the law: Divorce laws
and family distress. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (1), 267–288.
Sun, L. (2020, September). EVENTSTUDYWEIGHTS: Stata module to estimate the implied weights on the cohort-specific average treatment effects on the treated (CATTs)
(event study specifications).
Sun, L. (2021, August). EVENTSTUDYINTERACT: Stata module to implement the
interaction weighted estimator for an event study.
Sun, L. and S. Abraham (2021). Estimating dynamic treatment effects in event studies
with heterogeneous treatment effects. Journal of Econometrics 225, 175–199.
Wolfers, J. (2006a). Did unilateral divorce laws raise divorce rates? a reconciliation and
new results. American Economic Review 96 (5), 1802–1820.
Wolfers, J. (2006b). Replication data for: Did unilateral divorce laws raise divorce rates?
a reconciliation and new results. Technical report, Nashville, TN: American Economic
Association [publisher], 2006. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political
and Social Research [distributor], 2019-12-07, https://doi.org/10.3886/E116250V1.
Wooldridge, J. (2021). Two-way fixed effects, the two-way mundlak regression, and
difference-in-differences estimators. Available at SSRN 3906345.
Zhang, S. and C. de Chaisemartin (2020, October). did multiplegt: DID Estimation with
Multiple Groups and Periods in R.
Zhang, S. and C. de Chaisemartin (2021, May). TwowayFEWeights: Estimation of the
Weights Attached to the Two-Way Fixed Effects Regressions in R.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3980758

